VOLUME I.

CHAPTER I.

Mr. Vavasor and His Daughter.


Whether or no, she, whom you are to forgive, if you can, did or did
not belong to the Upper Ten Thousand of this our English world, I am
not prepared to say with any strength of affirmation. By blood she
was connected with big people,--distantly connected with some very
big people indeed, people who belonged to the Upper Ten Hundred if
there be any such division; but of these very big relations she had
known and seen little, and they had cared as little for her. Her
grandfather, Squire Vavasor of Vavasor Hall, in Westmoreland, was a
country gentleman, possessing some thousand a year at the outside,
and he therefore never came up to London, and had no ambition to have
himself numbered as one in any exclusive set. A hot-headed, ignorant,
honest old gentleman, he lived ever at Vavasor Hall, declaring to any
who would listen to him, that the country was going to the mischief,
and congratulating himself that at any rate, in his county,
parliamentary reform had been powerless to alter the old political
arrangements. Alice Vavasor, whose offence against the world I am to
tell you, and if possible to excuse, was the daughter of his younger
son; and as her father, John Vavasor, had done nothing to raise
the family name to eminence, Alice could not lay claim to any high
position from her birth as a Vavasor. John Vavasor had come up to
London early in life as a barrister, and had failed. He had failed at
least in attaining either much wealth or much repute, though he had
succeeded in earning, or perhaps I might better say, in obtaining,
a livelihood. He had married a lady somewhat older than himself,
who was in possession of four hundred a year, and who was related
to those big people to whom I have alluded. Who these were and the
special nature of the relationship, I shall be called upon to explain
hereafter, but at present it will suffice to say that Alice Macleod
gave great offence to all her friends by her marriage. She did not,
however, give them much time for the indulgence of their anger.
Having given birth to a daughter within twelve months of her
marriage, she died, leaving in abeyance that question as to whether
the fault of her marriage should or should not be pardoned by her
family.

When a man marries an heiress for her money, if that money be within
her own control, as was the case with Miss Macleod's fortune, it is
generally well for the speculating lover that the lady's friends
should quarrel with him and with her. She is thereby driven to throw
herself entirely into the gentleman's arms, and he thus becomes
possessed of the wife and the money without the abominable nuisance
of stringent settlements. But the Macleods, though they quarrelled
with Alice, did not quarrel with her _Ã  l'outrance_. They snubbed
herself and her chosen husband; but they did not so far separate
themselves from her and her affairs as to give up the charge of her
possessions. Her four hundred a year was settled very closely on
herself and on her children, without even a life interest having
been given to Mr. Vavasor, and therefore when she died the mother's
fortune became the property of the little baby. But, under these
circumstances, the big people did not refuse to interest themselves
to some extent on behalf of the father. I do not suppose that any
actual agreement or compact was made between Mr. Vavasor and the
Macleods; but it came to be understood between them that if he made
no demand upon them for his daughter's money, and allowed them to
have charge of her education, they would do something for him. He was
a practising barrister, though his practice had never amounted to
much; and a practising barrister is always supposed to be capable of
filling any situation which may come his way. Two years after his
wife's death Mr. Vavasor was appointed assistant commissioner in some
office which had to do with insolvents, and which was abolished three
years after his appointment. It was at first thought that he would
keep his eight hundred a year for life and be required to do nothing
for it; but a wretched cheeseparing Whig government, as John Vavasor
called it when describing the circumstances of the arrangement to his
father, down in Westmoreland, would not permit this; it gave him the
option of taking four hundred a year for doing nothing, or of keeping
his whole income and attending three days a week for three hours
a day during term time, at a miserable dingy little office near
Chancery Lane, where his duty would consist in signing his name to
accounts which he never read, and at which he was never supposed even
to look. He had sulkily elected to keep the money, and this signing
had been now for nearly twenty years the business of his life. Of
course he considered himself to be a very hardly-used man. One Lord
Chancellor after another he petitioned, begging that he might be
relieved from the cruelty of his position, and allowed to take his
salary without doing anything in return for it. The amount of work
which he did perform was certainly a minimum of labour. Term time, as
terms were counted in Mr. Vavasor's office, hardly comprised half the
year, and the hours of weekly attendance did not do more than make
one day's work a week for a working man; but Mr. Vavasor had been
appointed an assistant commissioner, and with every Lord Chancellor
he argued that all Westminster Hall, and Lincoln's Inn to boot, had
no right to call upon him to degrade himself by signing his name to
accounts. In answer to every memorial he was offered the alternative
of freedom with half his income; and so the thing went on.

There can, however, be no doubt that Mr. Vavasor was better off and
happier with his almost nominal employment than he would have been
without it. He always argued that it kept him in London; but he
would undoubtedly have lived in London with or without his official
occupation. He had become so habituated to London life in a small
way, before the choice of leaving London was open to him, that
nothing would have kept him long away from it. After his wife's death
he dined at his club every day on which a dinner was not given to him
by some friend elsewhere, and was rarely happy except when so dining.
They who have seen him scanning the steward's list of dishes, and
giving the necessary orders for his own and his friend's dinner, at
about half past four in the afternoon, have seen John Vavasor at
the only moment of the day at which he is ever much in earnest. All
other things are light and easy to him,--to be taken easily and to be
dismissed easily. Even the eating of the dinner calls forth from him
no special sign of energy. Sometimes a frown will gather on his brow
as he tastes the first half glass from his bottle of claret; but as
a rule that which he has prepared for himself with so much elaborate
care, is consumed with only pleasant enjoyment. Now and again it will
happen that the cook is treacherous even to him, and then he can hit
hard; but in hitting he is quiet, and strikes with a smile on his
face.

Such had been Mr. Vavasor's pursuits and pleasures in life up to the
time at which my story commences. But I must not allow the reader to
suppose that he was a man without good qualities. Had he when young
possessed the gift of industry I think that he might have shone in
his profession, and have been well spoken of and esteemed in the
world. As it was he was a discontented man, but nevertheless he was
popular, and to some extent esteemed. He was liberal as far as his
means would permit; he was a man of his word; and he understood well
that code of by-laws which was presumed to constitute the character
of a gentleman in his circle. He knew how to carry himself well among
men, and understood thoroughly what might be said, and what might
not; what might be done among those with whom he lived, and what
should be left undone. By nature, too, he was kindly disposed, loving
many persons a little if he loved few or none passionately. Moreover,
at the age of fifty, he was a handsome man, with a fine forehead,
round which the hair and beard was only beginning to show itself to
be grey. He stood well, with a large person, only now beginning to
become corpulent. His eyes were bright and grey, and his mouth and
chin were sharply cut, and told of gentle birth. Most men who knew
John Vavasor well, declared it to be a pity that he should spend his
time in signing accounts in Chancery Lane.

I have said that Alice Vavasor's big relatives cared but little for
her in her early years; but I have also said that they were careful
to undertake the charge of her education, and I must explain away
this little discrepancy. The biggest of these big people had hardly
heard of her; but there was a certain Lady Macleod, not very big
herself, but, as it were, hanging on to the skirts of those who
were so, who cared very much for Alice. She was the widow of a Sir
Archibald Macleod, K.C.B., who had been a soldier, she herself having
also been a Macleod by birth; and for very many years past--from
a time previous to the birth of Alice Vavasor--she had lived at
Cheltenham, making short sojourns in London during the spring, when
the contents of her limited purse would admit of her doing so. Of
old Lady Macleod I think I may say that she was a good woman;--that
she was a good woman, though subject to two of the most serious
drawbacks to goodness which can afflict a lady. She was a Calvinistic
Sabbatarian in religion, and in worldly matters she was a devout
believer in the high rank of her noble relatives. She could almost
worship a youthful marquis, though he lived a life that would
disgrace a heathen among heathens; and she could and did, in her own
mind, condemn crowds of commonplace men and women to all eternal
torments of which her imagination could conceive, because they
listened to profane music in a park on Sunday. Yet she was a good
woman. Out of her small means she gave much away. She owed no man
anything. She strove to love her neighbours. She bore much pain with
calm unspeaking endurance, and she lived in trust of a better world.
Alice Vavasor, who was after all only her cousin, she loved with an
exceeding love, and yet Alice had done very much to extinguish such
love. Alice, in the years of her childhood, had been brought up by
Lady Macleod; at the age of twelve she had been sent to a school at
Aix-la-Chapelle,--a comitatus of her relatives having agreed that
such was to be her fate, much in opposition to Lady Macleod's
judgement; at nineteen she had returned to Cheltenham, and after
remaining there for little more than a year, had expressed her
unwillingness to remain longer with her cousin. She could sympathize
neither with her relative's faults or virtues. She made an
arrangement, therefore, with her father, that they two would keep
house together in London, and so they had lived for the last five
years;--for Alice Vavasor when she will be introduced to the reader
had already passed her twenty-fourth birthday.

Their mode of life had been singular and certainly not in all
respects satisfactory. Alice when she was twenty-one had the full
command of her own fortune; and when she induced her father, who for
the last fifteen years had lived in lodgings, to take a small house
in Queen Anne Street, of course she offered to incur a portion of
the expense. He had warned her that his habits were not those of a
domestic man, but he had been content simply so to warn her. He had
not felt it to be his duty to decline the arrangement because he knew
himself to be unable to give to his child all that attention which
a widowed father under such circumstances should pay to an only
daughter. The house had been taken, and Alice and he had lived
together, but their lives had been quite apart. For a short time, for
a month or two, he had striven to dine at home and even to remain at
home through the evening; but the work had been too hard for him and
he had utterly broken down. He had said to her and to himself that
his health would fail him under the effects of so great a change made
so late in life, and I am not sure that he had not spoken truly. At
any rate the effort had been abandoned, and Mr. Vavasor now never
dined at home. Nor did he and his daughter ever dine out together.
Their joint means did not admit of their giving dinners, and
therefore they could not make their joint way in the same circle. It
thus came to pass that they lived apart,--quite apart. They saw each
other, probably daily; but they did little more than see each other.
They did not even breakfast together, and after three o'clock in the
day Mr. Vavasor was never to be found in his own house.

Miss Vavasor had made for herself a certain footing in society,
though I am disposed to doubt her right to be considered as holding
a place among the Upper Ten Thousand. Two classes of people she had
chosen to avoid, having been driven to such avoidings by her aunt's
preferences; marquises and such-like, whether wicked or otherwise,
she had eschewed, and had eschewed likewise all Low Church
tendencies. The eschewing of marquises is not generally very
difficult. Young ladies living with their fathers on very moderate
incomes in or about Queen Anne Street are not usually much troubled
on that matter. Nor can I say that Miss Vavasor was so troubled. But
with her there was a certain definite thing to be done towards such
eschewal. Lady Macleod by no means avoided her noble relatives,
nor did she at all avoid Alice Vavasor. When in London she was
persevering in her visits to Queen Anne Street, though she considered
herself, nobody knew why, not to be on speaking terms with Mr.
Vavasor. And she strove hard to produce an intimacy between Alice
and her noble relatives--such an intimacy as that which she herself
enjoyed;--an intimacy which gave her a footing in their houses but no
footing in their hearts, or even in their habits. But all this Alice
declined with as much consistency as she did those other struggles
which her old cousin made on her behalf,--strong, never-flagging,
but ever-failing efforts to induce the girl to go to such places of
worship as Lady Macleod herself frequented.

A few words must be said as to Alice Vavasor's person; one fact
also must be told, and then, I believe, I may start upon my story.
As regards her character, I will leave it to be read in the story
itself. The reader already knows that she appears upon the scene at
no very early age, and the mode of her life had perhaps given to her
an appearance of more years than those which she really possessed. It
was not that her face was old, but that there was nothing that was
girlish in her manners. Her demeanour was as staid, and her voice
as self-possessed as though she had already been ten years married.
In person she was tall and well made, rather large in her neck and
shoulders, as were all the Vavasors, but by no means fat. Her hair
was brown, but very dark, and she wore it rather lower upon her
forehead than is customary at the present day. Her eyes, too, were
dark, though they were not black, and her complexion, though not
quite that of a brunette, was far away from being fair. Her nose was
somewhat broad, and _retroussÃ©_ too, but to my thinking it was a
charming nose, full of character, and giving to her face at times a
look of pleasant humour, which it would otherwise have lacked. Her
mouth was large, and full of character, and her chin oval, dimpled,
and finely chiselled, like her father's. I beg you, in taking her for
all in all, to admit that she was a fine, handsome, high-spirited
young woman.

And now for my fact. At the time of which I am writing she was
already engaged to be married.




CHAPTER II.

Lady Macleod.


I can not say that the house in Queen Anne Street was a pleasant
house. I am now speaking of the material house, made up of the walls
and furniture, and not of any pleasantness or unpleasantness supplied
by the inmates. It was a small house on the south side of the street,
squeezed in between two large mansions which seemed to crush it,
and by which its fair proportion of doorstep and area was in truth
curtailed. The stairs were narrow; the dining-room was dark, and
possessed none of those appearances of plenteous hospitality which a
dining-room should have. But all this would have been as nothing if
the drawing-room had been pretty as it is the bounden duty of all
drawing-rooms to be. But Alice Vavasor's drawing-room was not pretty.
Her father had had the care of furnishing the house, and he had
intrusted the duty to a tradesman who had chosen green paper, a green
carpet, green curtains, and green damask chairs. There was a green
damask sofa, and two green arm-chairs opposite to each other at the
two sides of the fireplace. The room was altogether green, and was
not enticing. In shape it was nearly square, the very small back room
on the same floor not having been, as is usual, added to it. This had
been fitted up as a "study" for Mr. Vavasor, and was very rarely used
for any purpose.

Most of us know when we enter a drawing-room whether it is a pretty
room or no; but how few of us know how to make a drawing-room pretty!
There has come up in London in these latter days a form of room so
monstrously ugly that I will venture to say that no other people on
earth but Londoners would put up with it. Londoners, as a rule, take
their houses as they can get them, looking only to situation, size,
and price. What Grecian, what Roman, what Turk, what Italian would
endure, or would ever have endured, to use a room with a monstrous
cantle in the form of a parallelogram cut sheerly out of one corner
of it? This is the shape of room we have now adopted,--or rather
which the builders have adopted for us,--in order to throw the whole
first floor into one apartment which may be presumed to have noble
dimensions,--with such drawback from it as the necessities of the
staircase may require. A sharp unadorned corner projects itself into
these would-be noble dimensions, and as ugly a form of chamber is
produced as any upon which the eye can look. I would say more on
the subject if I dared to do so here, but I am bound now to confine
myself to Miss Vavasor's room. The monstrous deformity of which I
have spoken was not known when that house in Queen Anne Street was
built. There is to be found no such abomination of shape in the
buildings of our ancestors,--not even in the days of George the
Second. But yet the drawing-room of which I speak was ugly, and Alice
knew that it was so. She knew that it was ugly, and she would greatly
have liked to banish the green sofa, to have re-papered the wall, and
to have hung up curtains with a dash of pink through them. With the
green carpet she would have been contented. But her father was an
extravagant man; and from the day on which she had come of age she
had determined that it was her special duty to avoid extravagance.

"It's the ugliest room I ever saw in my life," her father once said
to her.

"It is not very pretty," Alice replied.

"I'll go halves with you in the expense of redoing it," said Mr.
Vavasor.

"Wouldn't that be extravagant, papa? The things have not been here
quite four years yet."

Then Mr. Vavasor had shrugged his shoulders and said nothing more
about it. It was little to him whether the drawing-room in Queen
Anne Street was ugly or pretty. He was on the committee of his club,
and he took care that the furniture there should be in all respects
comfortable.

It was now June; and that month Lady Macleod was in the habit of
spending among her noble relatives in London when she had succeeded
in making both ends so far overlap each other at Cheltenham as to
give her the fifty pounds necessary for this purpose. For though she
spent her month in London among her noble friends, it must not be
supposed that her noble friends gave her bed or board. They sometimes
gave her tea, such as it was, and once or twice in the month they
gave the old lady a second-rate dinner. On these occasions she
hired a little parlour and bedroom behind it in King Street, Saint
James's, and lived a hot, uncomfortable life, going about at nights
to gatherings of fashionable people of which she in her heart
disapproved, seeking for smiles which seldom came to her, and which
she excused herself for desiring because they were the smiles of her
kith and her kin, telling herself always that she made this vain
journey to the modern Babylon for the good of Alice Vavasor, and
telling herself as often that she now made it for the last time. On
the occasion of her preceding visit she had reminded herself that
she was then seventy-five years old, and had sworn to herself that
she would come to London no more; but here she was again in London,
having justified the journey to herself on the plea that there were
circumstances in Alice's engagement which made it desirable that she
should for a while be near her niece. Her niece, as she thought, was
hardly managing her own affairs discreetly.

"Well, aunt," said Alice, as the old lady walked into the
drawing-room one morning at eleven o'clock. Alice always called Lady
Macleod her aunt, though, as has been before explained, there was no
such close connexion between them. During Lady Macleod's sojourn in
London these morning visits were made almost every day. Alice never
denied herself, and even made a point of remaining at home to receive
them unless she had previously explained that she would be out; but I
am not prepared to say that they were, of their own nature, agreeable
to her.

"Would you mind shutting the window, my dear?" said Lady Macleod,
seating herself stiffly on one of the small ugly green chairs. She
had been educated at a time when easy-chairs were considered vicious,
and among people who regarded all easy postures as being so; and she
could still boast, at seventy-six, that she never leaned back. "Would
you mind shutting the window? I'm so warm that I'm afraid of the
draught."


[Illustration: "Would you mind shutting the window?"]


"You don't mean to say that you've walked from King Street," said
Alice, doing as she was desired.

"Indeed I do,--every step of the way. Cabs are so ruinous. It's a
most unfortunate thing; they always say it's just over the two miles
here. I don't believe a word of it, because I'm only a little more
than the half-hour walking it; and those men will say anything. But
how can I prove it, you know?"

"I really think it's too far for you to walk when it's so warm."

"But what can I do, my dear? I must come, when I've specially come up
to London to see you. I shall have a cab back again, because it'll
be hotter then, and dear Lady Midlothian has promised to send her
carriage at three to take me to the concert. I do so wish you'd go,
Alice."

"It's out of the question, aunt. The idea of my going in that way at
the last moment, without any invitation!"

"It wouldn't be without an invitation, Alice. The marchioness has
said to me over and over again how glad she would be to see you, if
I would bring you."

"Why doesn't she come and call if she is so anxious to know me?"

"My dear, you've no right to expect it; you haven't indeed. She never
calls even on me."

"I know I've no right, and I don't expect it, and I don't want
it. But neither has she a right to suppose that, under such
circumstances, I shall go to her house. You might as well give it up,
aunt. Cart ropes wouldn't drag me there."

"I think you are very wrong,--particularly under your present
circumstances. A young woman that is going to be married, as you
are--"

"As I am,--perhaps."

"That's nonsense, Alice. Of course you are; and for his sake you are
bound to cultivate any advantages that naturally belong to you. As to
Lady Midlothian or the marchioness coming to call on you here in your
father's house, after all that has passed, you really have no right
to look for it."

"And I don't look for it."

"That sort of people are not expected to call. If you'll think of it,
how could they do it with all the demands they have on their time?"

"My dear aunt, I wouldn't interfere with their time for worlds."

"Nobody can say of me, I'm sure, that I run after great people or
rich people. It does happen that some of the nearest relations I
have,--indeed I may say the nearest relations,--are people of high
rank; and I do not see that I'm bound to turn away from my own flesh
and blood because of that, particularly when they are always so
anxious to keep up the connexion."

"I was only speaking of myself, aunt. It is very different with you.
You have known them all your life."

"And how are you to know them if you won't begin? Lady Midlothian
said to me only yesterday that she was glad to hear that you were
going to be married so respectably, and then--"

"Upon my word I'm very much obliged to her ladyship. I wonder whether
she considered that she married respectably when she took Lord
Midlothian?"

Now Lady Midlothian had been unfortunate in her marriage, having
united herself to a man of bad character, who had used her ill, and
from whom she had now been for some years separated. Alice might have
spared her allusion to this misfortune when speaking of the countess
to the cousin who was so fond of her, but she was angered by the
application of that odious word respectable to her own prospects;
and perhaps the more angered as she was somewhat inclined to feel
that the epithet did suit her own position. Her engagement, she
had sometimes told herself, was very respectable, and had as often
told herself that it lacked other attractions which it should have
possessed. She was not quite pleased with herself in having accepted
John Grey,--or rather perhaps was not satisfied with herself in
having loved him. In her many thoughts on the subject, she always
admitted to herself that she had accepted him simply because she
loved him;--that she had given her quick assent to his quick proposal
simply because he had won her heart. But she was sometimes almost
angry with herself that she had permitted her heart to be thus easily
taken from her, and had rebuked herself for her girlish facility.
But the marriage would be at any rate respectable. Mr. Grey was a man
of high character, of good though moderate means; he was, too, well
educated, of good birth, a gentleman, and a man of talent. No one
could deny that the marriage would be highly respectable, and her
father had been more than satisfied. Why Miss Vavasor herself was
not quite satisfied will, I hope, in time make itself appear. In the
meanwhile it can be understood that Lady Midlothian's praise would
gall her.

"Alice, don't be uncharitable," said Lady Macleod severely. "Whatever
may have been Lady Midlothian's misfortunes no one can say they have
resulted from her own fault."

"Yes they can, aunt, if she married a man whom she knew to be a
scapegrace because he was very rich and an earl."

"She was the daughter of a nobleman herself, and only married in
her own degree. But I don't want to discuss that. She meant to be
good-natured when she mentioned your marriage, and you should take
it as it was meant. After all she was only your mother's second
cousin--"

"Dear aunt, I make no claim on her cousinship."

"But she admits the claim, and is quite anxious that you should know
her. She has been at the trouble to find out everything about Mr.
Grey, and told me that nothing could be more satisfactory."

"Upon my word I am very much obliged to her."

Lady Macleod was a woman of much patience, and possessed also
of considerable perseverance. For another half-hour she went on
expatiating on the advantages which would accrue to Alice as a
married woman from an acquaintance with her noble relatives, and
endeavouring to persuade her that no better opportunity than the
present would present itself. There would be a place in Lady
Midlothian's carriage, as none other of the daughters were going but
Lady Jane. Lady Midlothian would take it quite as a compliment, and a
concert was not like a ball or any customary party. An unmarried girl
might very properly go to a concert under such circumstances as now
existed without any special invitation. Lady Macleod ought to have
known her adopted niece better. Alice was immoveable. As a matter
of course she was immoveable. Lady Macleod had seldom been able to
persuade her to anything, and ought to have been well sure that, of
all things, she could not have persuaded her to this.

Then, at last, they came to another subject, as to which Lady Macleod
declared that she had specially come on this special morning,
forgetting, probably, that she had already made the same assertion
with reference to the concert. But in truth the last assertion was
the correct one, and on that other subject she had been hurried
on to say more than she meant by the eagerness of the moment. All
the morning she had been full of the matter on which she was now
about to speak. She had discussed it quite at length with Lady
Midlothian;--though she was by no means prepared to tell Alice
Vavasor that any such discussion had taken place. From the concert,
and the effect which Lady Midlothian's countenance might have upon
Mr. Grey's future welfare, she got herself by degrees round to a
projected Swiss tour which Alice was about to make. Of this Swiss
tour she had heard before, but had not heard who were to be Miss
Vavasor's companions until Lady Midlothian had told her. How it had
come to pass that Lady Midlothian had interested herself so much in
the concerns of a person whom she did not know, and on whom she in
her greatness could not be expected to call, I can not say; but from
some quarter she had learned who were the proposed companions of
Alice Vavasor's tour, and she had told Lady Macleod that she did not
at all approve of the arrangement.

"And when do you go, Alice?" said Lady Macleod.

"Early in July, I believe. It will be very hot, but Kate must be back
by the middle of August." Kate Vavasor was Alice's first cousin.

"Oh! Kate is to go with you?"

"Of course she is. I could not go alone, or with no one but George.
Indeed it was Kate who made up the party."

"Of course you could not go alone with George," said Lady Macleod,
very grimly. Now George Vavasor was Kate's brother, and was therefore
also first cousin to Alice. He was heir to the old squire down in
Westmoreland, with whom Kate lived, their father being dead. Nothing,
it would seem, could be more rational than that Alice should go to
Switzerland with her cousins; but Lady Macleod was clearly not of
this opinion; she looked very grim as she made this allusion to
cousin George, and seemed to be preparing herself for a fight.

"That is exactly what I say," answered Alice. "But, indeed, he is
simply going as an escort to me and Kate, as we don't like the rÃ´le
of unprotected females. It is very good-natured of him, seeing how
much his time is taken up."

"I thought he never did anything."

"That's because you don't know him, aunt."

"No; certainly I don't know him." She did not add that she had no
wish to know Mr. George Vavasor, but she looked it. "And has your
father been told that he is going?"

"Of course he has."

"And does--" Lady Macleod hesitated a little before she went on, and
then finished her question with a little spasmodic assumption of
courage. "And does Mr. Grey know that he is going?"

Alice remained silent for a full minute before she answered this
question, during which Lady Macleod sat watching her grimly, with her
eyes very intent upon her niece's face. If she supposed such silence
to have been in any degree produced by shame in answering the
question, she was much mistaken. But it may be doubted whether she
understood the character of the girl whom she thought she knew so
well, and it is probable that she did make such mistake.

"I might tell you simply that he does," said Alice at last, "seeing
that I wrote to him yesterday, letting him know that such were our
arrangements; but I feel that I should not thus answer the question
you mean to ask. You want to know whether Mr. Grey will approve of it.
As I only wrote yesterday of course I have not heard, and therefore
can not say. But I can say this, aunt, that much as I might regret his
disapproval, it would make no change in my plans."

"Would it not? Then I must tell you, you are very wrong. It ought
to make a change. What! the disapproval of the man you are going to
marry make no change in your plans?"

"Not in that matter. Come, aunt, if we must discuss this matter let
us do it at any rate fairly. In an ordinary way, if Mr. Grey had asked
me to give up for any reason my trip altogether, I should have given
it up certainly, as I would give up any other indifferent project at
the request of so dear a friend,--a friend with whom I am so--so--so
closely connected. But if he asked me not to travel with my cousin
George, I should refuse him absolutely, without a word of parley
on the subject, simply because of the nature and closeness of my
connection with him. I suppose you understand what I mean, aunt?"

"I suppose I do. You mean that you would refuse to obey him on the
very subject on which he has a right to claim your obedience."

"He has no right to claim my obedience on any subject," said Alice;
and as she spoke Aunt Macleod jumped up with a little start at the
vehemence of the words, and of the tone in which they were expressed.
She had heard that tone before, and might have been used to it; but,
nevertheless, the little jump was involuntary. "At present he has no
right to my obedience on any subject, but least of all on that," said
Alice. "His advice he may give me, but I am quite sure he will not
ask for obedience."

"And if he advises you you will slight his advice."

"If he tells me that I had better not travel with my cousin George I
shall certainly not take his advice. Moreover, I should be careful to
let him know how much I was offended by any such counsel from him.
It would show a littleness on his part, and a suspicion of which I
can not suppose him to be capable." Alice, as she said this, got up
from her seat and walked about the room. When she had finished she
stood at one of the windows with her back to her visitor. There was
silence between them for a minute or two, during which Lady Macleod
was deeply considering how best she might speak the terrible words,
which, as Alice's nearest female relative, she felt herself bound to
utter. At last she collected her thoughts and her courage, and spoke
out.

"My dear Alice, I need hardly say that if you had a mother living,
or any person with you filling the place of a mother, I should not
interfere in this matter."

"Of course, Aunt Macleod, if you think I am wrong you have quite a
right to say so."

"I do think you are wrong,--very wrong, indeed; and if you persist in
this I am afraid I must say that I shall think you wicked. Of course
Mr. Grey can not like you to travel with George Vavasor."

"And why not, aunt?" Alice, as she asked this question, turned round
and confronted Lady Macleod boldly. She spoke with a steady voice,
and fixed her eyes upon the old lady's face, as though determined to
show that she had no fear of what might be said to her.

"Why not, Alice? Surely you do not wish me to say why not."

"But I do wish you to say why not. How can I defend myself till the
accusation is made?"

"You are now engaged to marry Mr. Grey, with the consent and
approbation of all your friends. Two years ago you had--had--"

"Had what, aunt? If you mean to say that two years ago I was engaged
to my cousin George you are mistaken. Three years ago I told him
that under certain conditions I would become engaged to him. But my
conditions did not suit him, nor his me, and no engagement was ever
made. Mr. Grey knows the history of the whole thing. As far as it was
possible I have told him everything that took place."

"The fact was, Alice, that George Vavasor's mode of life was such
that an engagement with him would have been absolute madness."

"Dear aunt, you must excuse me if I say that I can not discuss George
Vavasor's mode of life. If I were thinking of becoming his wife you
would have a perfect right to discuss it, because of your constant
kindness to me. But as matters are he is simply a cousin; and as I
like him and you do not, we had better say nothing about him."

"I must say this--that after what has passed, and at the present
crisis of your life--"

"Dear aunt, I'm not in any crisis."

"Yes you are, Alice; in the most special crisis of a girl's life. You
are still a girl, but you are the promised wife of a very worthy man,
who will look to you for all his domestic happiness. George Vavasor
has the name, at least, of being very wild."

"The worthy man and the wild man must fight it out between them. If I
were going away with George by himself, there might be something in
what you say."

"That would be monstrous."

"Monstrous or not, it isn't what I'm about to do. Kate and I have put
our purses together, and are going to have an outing for our special
fun and gratification. As we should be poor travellers alone, George
has promised to go with his sister. Papa knows all about it, and
never thought of making any objection."

Lady Macleod shook her head. She did not like to say anything against
Mr. Vavasor before his daughter; but the shaking of her head was
intended to signify that Mr. Vavasor's assent in such a matter was
worth nothing.

"I can only say again," said Lady Macleod, "that I think Mr. Grey
will be displeased,--and that he will have very great cause for
displeasure. And I think, moreover, that his approbation ought to be
your chief study. I believe, my dear, I'll ask you to let Jane get me
a cab. I shan't have a bit too much time to dress for the concert."

Alice simply rang the bell, and said no further word on the subject
which they had been discussing. When Lady Macleod got up to go away,
Alice kissed her, as was customary with them, and the old lady as
she went uttered her customary valediction. "God bless you, my dear.
Good-bye! I'll come to-morrow if I can." There was therefore no
quarrel between them. But both of them felt that words had been
spoken which must probably lead to some diminution of their past
intimacy.

When Lady Macleod had gone Alice sat alone for an hour thinking of
what had passed between them,--thinking rather of those two men, the
worthy man and the wild man, whose names had been mentioned in close
connection with herself. John Grey was a worthy man, a man worthy at
all points, as far as she knew him. She told herself it was so. And
she told herself, also, that her cousin George was wild,--very wild.
And yet her thoughts were, I fear, on the whole more kindly towards
her cousin than towards her lover. She had declared to her aunt that
John Grey would be incapable of such suspicion as would be shown by
any objection on his part to the arrangements made for the tour. She
had said so, and had so believed; and yet she continued to brood
over the position which her affairs would take, if he did make the
objection which Lady Macleod anticipated. She told herself over and
over again, that under such circumstances she would not give way an
inch. "He is free to go," she said to herself. "If he does not trust
me he is quite free to go." It may almost be said that she came at
last to anticipate from her lover that very answer to her own letter
which she had declared him to be incapable of making.




CHAPTER III.

John Grey, the Worthy Man.


Mr. Grey's answer to Alice Vavasor's letter, which was duly sent by
return of post and duly received on the morning after Lady Macleod's
visit, may perhaps be taken as giving a sample of his worthiness. It
was dated from Nethercoats, a small country-house in Cambridgeshire
which belonged to him, at which he already spent much of his time,
and at which he intended to live altogether after his marriage.


   Nethercoats, June, 186--.

   DEAREST ALICE,

   I am glad you have settled your affairs,--foreign affairs,
   I mean,--so much to your mind. As to your home affairs
   they are not, to my thinking, quite so satisfactorily
   arranged. But as I am a party interested in the latter my
   opinion may perhaps have an undue bias. Touching the tour,
   I quite agree with you that you and Kate would have been
   uncomfortable alone. It's a very fine theory, that of
   women being able to get along without men as well as with
   them; but, like other fine theories, it will be found very
   troublesome by those who first put it in practice. Gloved
   hands, petticoats, feminine softness, and the general
   homage paid to beauty, all stand in the way of success.
   These things may perhaps some day be got rid of, and
   possibly with advantage; but while young ladies are still
   encumbered with them a male companion will always be found
   to be a comfort. I don't quite know whether your cousin
   George is the best possible knight you might have chosen.
   I should consider myself to be infinitely preferable,
   had my going been upon the cards. Were you in danger
   of meeting Paynim foes, he, no doubt, would kill them
   off much quicker than I could do, and would be much
   more serviceable in liberating you from the dungeons
   of oppressors, or even from stray tigers in the Swiss
   forests. But I doubt his being punctual with the luggage.
   He will want you or Kate to keep the accounts, if any are
   kept. He will be slow in getting you glasses of water at
   the railway stations, and will always keep you waiting at
   breakfast. I hold that a man with two ladies on a tour
   should be an absolute slave to them, or they will not
   fully enjoy themselves. He should simply be an upper
   servant, with the privilege of sitting at the same table
   with his mistresses. I have my doubts as to whether your
   cousin is fit for the place; but, as to myself, it is just
   the thing that I was made for. Luckily, however, neither
   you nor Kate are without wills of your own, and perhaps
   you may be able to reduce Mr. Vavasor to obedience.

   As to the home affairs I have very little to say here,--in
   this letter. I shall of course run up and see you before
   you start, and shall probably stay a week in town. I know
   I ought not to do so, as it will be a week of idleness,
   and yet not a week of happiness. I'd sooner have an hour
   with you in the country than a whole day in London. And I
   always feel in town that I've too much to do to allow of
   my doing anything. If it were sheer idleness I could enjoy
   it, but it is a feverish idleness, in which one is driven
   here and there, expecting some gratification which not
   only never comes, but which never even begins to come. I
   will, however, undergo a week of it,--say the last seven
   days of this month, and shall trust to you to recompense
   me by as much of yourself as your town doings will permit.

   And now again as to those home affairs. If I say nothing
   now I believe you will understand why I refrain. You
   have cunningly just left me to imply, from what you say,
   that all my arguments have been of no avail; but you do
   not answer them, or even tell me that you have decided.
   I shall therefore imply nothing, and still trust to my
   personal eloquence for success. Or rather not trust,--not
   trust, but hope.

   The garden is going on very well. We are rather short of
   water, and therefore not quite as bright as I had hoped;
   but we are preparing with untiring industry for future
   brightness. Your commands have been obeyed in all things,
   and Morrison always says "The mistress didn't mean this,"
   or "The mistress did intend that." God bless the mistress
   is what I now say, and send her home, to her own home,
   to her flowers, and her fruit, and her house, and her
   husband, as soon as may be, with no more of these delays
   which are to me so grievous, and which seem to me to be
   so unnecessary. That is my prayer.

   Yours ever and always,

   J. G.


"I didn't give commands," Alice said to herself, as she sat with the
letter at her solitary breakfast-table. "He asked me how I liked the
things, and of course I was obliged to say. I was obliged to seem to
care, even if I didn't care." Such were her first thoughts as she put
the letter back into its envelope, after reading it the second time.
When she opened it, which she did quickly, not pausing a moment
lest she should suspect herself of fearing to see what might be
its contents, her mind was full of that rebuke which her aunt had
anticipated, and which she had almost taught herself to expect. She
had torn the letter open rapidly, and had dashed at its contents with
quick eyes. In half a moment she had seen what was the nature of the
reply respecting the proposed companion of her tour, and then she had
completed her reading slowly enough. "No; I gave no commands," she
repeated to herself, as though she might thereby absolve herself from
blame in reference to some possible future accusations, which might
perhaps be brought against her under certain circumstances which she
was contemplating.

Then she considered the letter bit by bit, taking it backwards, and
sipping her tea every now and then amidst her thoughts. No; she had
no home, no house, there. She had no husband;--not as yet. He spoke
of their engagement as though it were a betrothal, as betrothals used
to be of yore; as though they were already in some sort married. Such
betrothals were not made now-a-days. There still remained, both to
him and to her, a certain liberty of extricating themselves from this
engagement. Should he come to her and say that he found that their
contemplated marriage would not make him happy, would not she release
him without a word of reproach? Would not she regard him as much
more honourable in doing so than in adhering to a marriage which was
distasteful to him? And if she would so judge him,--judge him and
certainly acquit him, was it not reasonable that she under similar
circumstances should expect a similar acquittal? Then she declared
to herself that she carried on this argument within her own breast
simply as an argument, induced to do so by that assertion on his part
that he was already her husband,--that his house was even now her
home. She had no intention of using that power which was still hers.
She had no wish to go back from her pledged word. She thought that
she had no such wish. She loved him much, and admired him even more
than she loved him. He was noble, generous, clever, good,--so good as
to be almost perfect; nay, for aught she knew he was perfect. Would
that he had some faults! Would that he had! Would that he had! How
could she, full of faults as she knew herself to be,--how could she
hope to make happy a man perfect as he was! But then there would
be no doubt as to her present duty. She loved him, and that was
everything. Having told him that she loved him, and having on that
score accepted his love, nothing but a change in her heart towards
him could justify her in seeking to break the bond which bound them
together. She did love him, and she loved him only.

But she had once loved her cousin. Yes, truly it was so. In her
thoughts she did not now deny it. She had loved him, and was
tormented by a feeling that she had had a more full delight in that
love than in this other that had sprung up subsequently. She had told
herself that this had come of her youth;--that love at twenty was
sweeter than it could be afterwards. There had been a something of
rapture in that earlier dream which could never be repeated,--which
could never live, indeed, except in a dream. Now, now that she was
older and perhaps wiser, love meant a partnership, in which each
partner would be honest to the other, in which each would wish and
strive for the other's welfare, so that thus their joint welfare
might be insured. Then, in those early girlish days, it had meant
a total abnegation of self. The one was of earth, and therefore
possible. The other had been a ray from heaven,--and impossible,
except in a dream.

And she had been mistaken in her first love. She admitted that
frankly. He whom she had worshipped had been an idol of clay, and she
knew that it was well for her to have abandoned that idolatry. He had
not only been untrue to her, but, worse than that, had been false in
excusing his untruth. He had not only promised falsely, but had made
such promises with a deliberate, premeditated falsehood. And he had
been selfish, coldly selfish, weighing the value of his own low lusts
against that of her holy love. She had known this, and had parted
from him with an oath to herself that no promised contrition on his
part should ever bring them again together. But she had pardoned him
as a man, though never as a lover, and had bade him welcome again
as a cousin and as her friend's brother. She had again become very
anxious as to his career, not hiding her regard, but professing that
anxiety aloud. She knew him to be clever, ambitious, bold,--and she
believed even yet, in spite of her own experience, that he might not
be bad at heart. Now, as she told herself that in truth she loved the
man to whom her troth was plighted, I fear that she almost thought
more of that other man from whom she had torn herself asunder.

"Why should he find himself unhappy in London?" she said, as she went
back to the letter. "Why should he pretend to condemn the very place
which most men find the fittest for all their energies? Were I a man,
no earthly consideration should induce me to live elsewhere. It is
odd how we differ in all things. However brilliant might be his own
light, he would be contented to hide it under a bushel!"

And at last she recurred to that matter as to which she had been
so anxious when she first opened her lover's letter. It will be
remembered how assured she had expressed herself that Mr. Grey would
not condescend to object to her travelling with her cousin. He had
not so condescended. He had written on the matter with a pleasant
joke, like a gentleman as he was, disdaining to allude to the past
passages in the life of her whom he loved, abstaining even from
expressing anything that might be taken as a permission on his part.
There had been in Alice's words, as she told him of their proposed
plan, a something that had betrayed a tremor in her thoughts. She
had studiously striven so to frame her phrases that her tale might
be told as any other simple statement,--as though there had been no
trembling in her mind as she wrote. But she had failed, and she knew
that she had failed. She had failed; and he had read all her effort
and all her failure. She was quite conscious of this; she felt it
thoroughly; and she knew that he was noble and a gentleman to the
last drop of his blood. And yet--yet--yet there was almost a feeling
of disappointment in that he had not written such a letter as Lady
Macleod had anticipated.

During the next week Lady Macleod still came almost daily to Queen
Anne Street, but nothing further was said between her and Miss
Vavasor as to the Swiss tour; nor were any questions asked about Mr.
Grey's opinion on the subject. The old lady of course discovered
that there was no quarrel, or, as she believed, any probability of a
quarrel; and with that she was obliged to be contented. Nor did she
again on this occasion attempt to take Alice to Lady Midlothian's.
Indeed, their usual subjects of conversation were almost abandoned,
and Lady Macleod's visits, though they were as constant as
heretofore, were not so long. She did not dare to talk about Mr. Grey,
and because she did not so dare, was determined to regard herself as
in a degree ill-used. So she was silent, reserved, and fretful. At
length came the last day of her London season, and her last visit
to her niece. "I would come because it's my last day," said Lady
Macleod; "but really I'm so hurried, and have so many things to do,
that I hardly know how to manage it."

"It's very kind," said Alice, giving her aunt an affectionate squeeze
of the hand.

"I'm keeping the cab, so I can just stay twenty-five minutes. I've
marked the time accurately, but I know the man will swear it's over
the half-hour."

"You'll have no more trouble about cabs, aunt, when you are back in
Cheltenham."

"The flies are worse, my dear. I really think they're worse. I pay
the bill every month, but they've always one down that I didn't have.
It's the regular practice, for I've had them from all the men in the
place."

"It's hard enough to find honest men anywhere, I suppose."

"Or honest women either. What do you think of Mrs. Green wanting to
charge me for an extra week, because she says I didn't give her
notice till Tuesday morning? I won't pay her, and she may stop my
things if she dares. However, it's the last time. I shall never come
up to London again, my dear."

"Oh, aunt, don't say that!"

"But I do say it, my dear. What should an old woman like me do,
trailing up to town every year, merely because it's what people
choose to call the season."

"To see your friends, of course. Age doesn't matter when a person's
health is so good as yours."

"If you knew what I suffer from lumbago,--though I must say coming
to London always does cure that for the time. But as for friends--!
Well, I suppose one has no right to complain when one gets to be as
old as I am; but I declare I believe that those I love best would
sooner be without me than with me."

"Do you mean me, aunt?"

"No, my dear, I don't mean you. Of course my life would have been
very different if you could have consented to remain with me till you
were married. But I didn't mean you. I don't know that I meant any
one. You shouldn't mind what an old woman like me says."

"You're a little melancholy because you're going away."

"No, indeed. I don't know why I stayed the last week. I did say to
Lady Midlothian that I thought I should go on the 20th; and, though I
know that she knew that I really didn't go, she has not once sent to
me since. To be sure they've been out every night; but I thought she
might have asked me to come and lunch. It's so very lonely dining by
myself in lodgings in London."

"And yet you never will come and dine with me."

"No, my dear; no. But we won't talk about that. I've just one word
more to say. Let me see. I've just six minutes to stay. I've made
up my mind that I'll never come up to town again,--except for one
thing."

"And what's that, aunt?" Alice, as she asked the question, well knew
what that one thing was.

"I'll come for your marriage, my dear. I do hope you will not keep me
long waiting."

"Ah! I can't make any promise. There's no knowing when that may be."

"And why should there be no knowing? I always think that when a girl
is once engaged the sooner she's married the better. There may be
reasons for delay on the gentleman's part."

"There very often are, you know,"

"But, Alice, you don't mean to say that Mr. Grey is putting it off?"

Alice was silent for a moment, during which Lady Macleod's face
assumed a look of almost tragic horror. Was there something wrong on
Mr. Grey's side of which she was altogether unaware? Alice, though for
a second or two she had been guilty of a slight playful deceit, was
too honest to allow the impression to remain. "No, aunt," she said;
"Mr. Grey is not putting it off. It has been left to me to fix the
time."

"And why don't you fix it?"

"It is such a serious thing! After all it is not more than four
months yet since I--I accepted him. I don't know that there has been
any delay."

"But you might fix the time now, if he wishes it."

"Well, perhaps I shall,--some day, aunt. I'm going to think about it,
and you mustn't drive me."

"But you should have some one to advise you, Alice."

"Ah! that's just it. People always do seem to think it so terrible
that a girl should have her own way in anything. She mustn't like any
one at first; and then, when she does like some one, she must marry
him directly she's bidden. I haven't much of my own way at present;
but you see, when I'm married I shan't have it at all. You can't
wonder that I shouldn't be in a hurry."

"I am not advocating anything like hurry, my dear. But, goodness
gracious me! I've been here twenty-eight minutes, and that horrid
man will impose upon me. Good-bye; God bless you! Mind you write."
And Lady Macleod hurried out of the room more intent at the present
moment upon saving her sixpence than she was on any other matter
whatsoever.

And then John Grey came up to town, arriving a day or two after the
time that he had fixed. It is not, perhaps, improbable that Alice
had used some diplomatic skill in preventing a meeting between Lady
Macleod and her lover. They both were very anxious to obtain the same
object, and Alice was to some extent opposed to their views. Had Lady
Macleod and John Grey put their forces together she might have found
herself unable to resist their joint endeavours. She was resolved
that she would not at any rate name any day for her marriage before
her return from Switzerland; and she may therefore have thought it
wise to keep Mr. Grey in the country till after Lady Macleod had gone,
even though she thereby cut down the time of his sojourn in London
to four days. On the occasion of that visit Mr. Vavasor did a very
memorable thing. He dined at home with the view of welcoming his
future son-in-law. He dined at home, and asked, or rather assented
to Alice's asking, George and Kate Vavasor to join the dinner-party.
"What an auspicious omen for the future nuptials!" said Kate, with
her little sarcastic smile. "Uncle John dines at home, and Mr. Grey
joins in the dissipation of a dinner-party. We shall all be changed
soon, I suppose, and George and I will take to keeping a little
cottage in the country."

"Kate," said Alice, angrily, "I think you are about the most unjust
person I ever met. I would forgive your raillery, however painful it
might be, if it were only fair."

"And to whom is it unfair on the present occasion;--to your father?"

"It was not intended for him."

"To yourself?"

"I care nothing as to myself; you know that very well."

"Then it must have been unfair to Mr. Grey."

"Yes; it was Mr. Grey whom you meant to attack. If I can forgive him
for not caring for society, surely you might do so."

"Exactly; but that's just what you can't do, my dear. You don't
forgive him. If you did you might be quite sure that I should say
nothing. And if you choose to bid me hold my tongue I will say
nothing. But when you tell me all your own thoughts about this
thing you can hardly expect but that I should let you know mine in
return. I'm not particular; and if you are ready for a little good,
wholesome, useful hypocrisy, I won't balk you. I mayn't be quite so
dishonest as you call me, but I'm not so wedded to truth but what I
can look, and act, and speak a few falsehoods if you wish it. Only
let us understand each other."

"You know I wish for no falsehood, Kate."

"I know it's very hard to understand what you do wish. I know that
for the last year or two I have been trying to find out your wishes,
and, upon my word, my success has been very indifferent. I suppose
you wish to marry Mr. Grey, but I'm by no means certain. I suppose the
last thing on earth you'd wish would be to marry George?"

"The very last. You're right there at any rate."

"Alice--! sometimes you drive me too hard; you do, indeed. You make
me doubt whether I hate or love you most. Knowing what my feelings
are about George, I can not understand how you can bring yourself to
speak of him to me with such contempt!" Kate Vavasor, as she spoke
these words, left the room with a quick step, and hurried up to her
own chamber. There Alice found her in tears, and was driven by her
friend's real grief into the expression of an apology, which she
knew was not properly due from her. Kate was acquainted with all the
circumstances of that old affair between her brother and Alice. She
had given in her adhesion to the propriety of what Alice had done.
She had allowed that her brother George's behaviour had been such as
to make any engagement between them impossible. The fault, therefore,
had been hers in making any reference to the question of such a
marriage. Nor had it been by any means her first fault of the same
kind. Till Alice had become engaged to Mr. Grey she had spoken of
George only as her brother, or as her friend's cousin, but now she
was constantly making allusion to those past occurrences, which all
of them should have striven to forget. Under these circumstances was
not Lady Macleod right in saying that George Vavasor should not have
been accepted as a companion for the Swiss tour?


[Illustration: "Sometimes you drive me too hard."]


The little dinner-party went off very quietly; and if no other ground
existed for charging Mr. Grey with London dissipation than what that
afforded, he was accused most unjustly. The two young men had never
before met each other; and Vavasor had gone to his uncle's house,
prepared not only to dislike but to despise his successor in Alice's
favour. But in this he was either disappointed or gratified, as the
case may be. "He has plenty to say for himself," he said to Kate on
his way home.

"Oh yes; he can talk."

"And he doesn't talk like a prig either, which was what I expected.
He's uncommonly handsome."

"I thought men never saw that in each other. I never see it in any
man."

"I see it in every animal--in men, women, horses, dogs, and even
pigs. I like to look on handsome things. I think people always do who
are ugly themselves."

"And so you're going into raptures in favour of John Grey."

"No, I'm not. I very seldom go into raptures about anything. But he
talks in the way I like a man to talk. How he bowled my uncle over
about those actors; and yet if my uncle knows anything about anything
it is about the stage twenty years ago." There was nothing more said
then about John Grey; but Kate understood her brother well enough to
be aware that this praise meant very little. George Vavasor spoke
sometimes from his heart, and did so more frequently to his sister
than to any one else; but his words came generally from his head.

On the day after the little dinner in Queen Anne Street, John Grey
came to say good-bye to his betrothed;--for his betrothed she
certainly was, in spite of those very poor arguments which she had
used in trying to convince herself that she was still free if she
wished to claim her freedom. Though he had been constantly with Alice
during the last three days, he had not hitherto said anything as to
the day of their marriage. He had been constantly with her alone,
sitting for hours in that ugly green drawing-room, but he had never
touched the subject. He had told her much of Switzerland, which she
had never yet seen but which he knew well. He had told her much of
his garden and house, whither she had once gone with her father,
whilst paying a visit nominally to the colleges at Cambridge. And he
had talked of various matters, matters bearing in no immediate way
upon his own or her affairs; for Mr. Grey was a man who knew well how
to make words pleasant; but previous to this last moment he had said
nothing on that subject on which he was so intent.

"Well, Alice," he said, when the last hour had come, "and about that
question of home affairs?"

"Let us finish off the foreign affairs first."

"We have finished them; haven't we?"

"Finished them! why we haven't started yet."

"No; you haven't started. But we've had the discussion. Is there any
reason why you'd rather not have this thing settled."

"No; no special reason."

"Then why not let it be fixed? Do you fear coming to me as my wife?"

"No."

"I can not think that you repent your goodness to me."

"No; I don't repent it;--what you call my goodness? I love you too
entirely for that."

"My darling!" And now he passed his arm round her waist as they stood
near the empty fireplace. "And if you love me--"

"I do love you."

"Then why should you not wish to come to me?"

"I do wish it. I think I wish it."

"But, Alice, you must have wished it altogether when you consented to
be my wife."

"A person may wish for a thing altogether, and yet not wish for it
instantly."

"Instantly! Come; I have not been hard on you. This is still June.
Will you say the middle of September, and we shall still be in time
for warm pleasant days among the lakes? Is that asking for too much?"

"It is not asking for anything."

"Nay, but it is, love. Grant it, and I will swear that you have
granted me everything."

She was silent, having things to say but not knowing in what words to
put them. Now that he was with her she could not say the things which
she had told herself that she would utter to him. She could not bring
herself to hint to him that his views of life were so unlike her own,
that there could be no chance of happiness between them, unless each
could strive to lean somewhat towards the other. No man could be more
gracious in word and manner than John Grey; no man more chivalrous in
his carriage towards a woman; but he always spoke and acted as though
there could be no question that his manner of life was to be adopted,
without a word or thought of doubting, by his wife. When two came
together, why should not each yield something, and each claim
something? This she had meant to say to him on this day; but now that
he was with her she could not say it.

"John," she said at last, "do not press me about this till I return."

"But then you will say the time is short. It would be short then."

"I can not answer you now;--indeed, I can not. That is I can not answer
in the affirmative. It is such a solemn thing."

"Will it ever be less solemn, dearest?"

"Never, I hope never."

He did not press her further then, but kissed her and bade her
farewell.




CHAPTER IV.

George Vavasor, the Wild Man.


It will no doubt be understood that George Vavasor did not roam about
in the woods unshorn, or wear leathern trappings and sandals, like
Robinson Crusoe, instead of coats and trousers. His wildness was of
another kind. Indeed, I don't know that he was in truth at all wild,
though Lady Macleod had called him so, and Alice had assented to her
use of the word.

George Vavasor had lived in London since he was twenty, and now, at
the time of the beginning of my story, he was a year or two over
thirty. He was and ever had been the heir to his grandfather's
estate; but that estate was small, and when George first came to
London his father was a strong man of forty, with as much promise
of life in him as his son had. A profession had therefore been
absolutely necessary to him; and he had, at his uncle John's
instance, been placed in the office of a parliamentary land agent.
With this parliamentary land agent he had quarrelled to the knife,
but not before he had by his talents made himself so useful that
he had before him the prospects of a lucrative partnership in the
business. George Vavasor had many faults, but idleness--absolute
idleness--was not one of them. He would occasionally postpone his
work to pleasure. He would be at Newmarket when he should have been
at Whitehall. But it was not usual with him to be in bed when he
should be at his desk, and when he was at his desk he did not whittle
his ruler, or pick his teeth, or clip his nails. Upon the whole
his friends were pleased with the first five years of his life in
London--in spite of his having been found to be in debt on more than
one occasion. But his debts had been paid; and all was going on
swimmingly, when one day he knocked down the parliamentary agent
with a blow between the eyes, and then there was an end of that.
He himself was wont to say that he had known very well what he was
about, that it had behoved him to knock down the man who was to have
been his partner, and that he regretted nothing in the matter. At any
rate the deed was looked upon with approving eyes by many men of good
standing,--or, at any rate, sufficient standing to help George to
another position; and within six weeks of the time of his leaving the
office at Whitehall, he had become a partner in an established firm
of wine merchants. A great-aunt had just then left him a couple of
thousand pounds, which no doubt assisted him in his views with the
wine merchants.

In this employment he remained for another period of five years, and
was supposed by all his friends to be doing very well. And indeed
he did not do badly, only that he did not do well enough to satisfy
himself. He was ambitious of making the house to which he belonged
the first house in the trade in London, and scared his partners by
the boldness and extent of his views. He himself declared that if
they would only have gone along with him he would have made them
princes in the wine market. But they were men either of more prudence
or of less audacity than he, and they declined to walk in his
courses. At the end of the five years Vavasor left the house, not
having knocked any one down on this occasion, and taking with him a
very nice sum of money.

The two last of these five years had certainly been the best period
of his life, for he had really worked very hard, like a man, giving
up all pleasure that took time from him,--and giving up also most
pleasures which were dangerous on account of their costliness. He
went to no races, played no billiards, and spoke of Cremorne as a
childish thing, which he had abandoned now that he was no longer
a child. It was during these two years that he had had his love
passages with his cousin; and it must be presumed that he had, at any
rate, intended at one time to settle himself respectably as a married
man. He had, however, behaved very badly to Alice, and the match had
been broken off.

He had also during the last two years quarrelled with his
grandfather. He had wished to raise a sum of money on the Vavasor
estate, which, as it was unentailed, he could only do with his
grandfather's concurrence. The old gentleman would not hear of
it,--would listen with no patience to the proposition. It was in
vain that George attempted to make the squire understand that the
wine business was going on very well, that he himself owed no man
anything, that everything with him was flourishing;--but that his
trade might be extended indefinitely by the use of a few thousand
pounds at moderate interest. Old Mr. Vavasor was furious. No documents
and no assurances could make him lay aside a belief that the wine
merchants, and the business, and his grandson were all ruined and
ruinous together. No one but a ruined man would attempt to raise
money on the family estate! So they had quarrelled, and had never
spoken or seen each other since. "He shall have the estate for his
life," the squire said to his son John. "I don't think I have a right
to leave it away from him. It never has been left away from the heir.
But I'll tie it up so that he shan't cut a tree on it." John Vavasor
perhaps thought that the old rule of primogeniture might under such
circumstances have been judiciously abandoned--in this one instance,
in his own favour. But he did not say so. Nor would he have said it
had there been a chance of his doing so with success. He was a man
from whom no very noble deed could be expected; but he was also one
who would do no ignoble deed.

After that George Vavasor had become a stockbroker, and a stockbroker
he was now. In the first twelve months after his leaving the wine
business,--the same being the first year after his breach with
Alice,--he had gone back greatly in the estimation of men. He had
lived in open defiance of decency. He had spent much money and had
apparently made none, and had been, as all his friends declared, on
the high road to ruin. Aunt Macleod had taken her judgement from this
period of his life when she had spoken of him as a man who never did
anything. But he had come forth again suddenly as a working man; and
now they who professed to know, declared that he was by no means
poor. He was in the City every day; and during the last two years had
earned the character of a shrewd fellow who knew what he was about,
who might not perhaps be very mealy-mouthed in affairs of business,
but who was fairly and decently honourable in his money transactions.
In fact, he stood well on 'Change.

And during these two years he had stood a contest for a seat in
Parliament, having striven to represent the metropolitan borough of
Chelsea, on the extremely Radical interest. It is true that he had
failed, and that he had spent a considerable sum of money in the
contest. "Where on earth does your nephew get his money?" men said to
John Vavasor at his club. "Upon my word I don't know," said Vavasor.
"He doesn't get it from me, and I'm sure he doesn't get it from my
father." But George Vavasor, though he failed at Chelsea, did not
spend his money altogether fruitlessly. He gained reputation by the
struggle, and men came to speak of him as though he were one who
would do something. He was a stockbroker, a thorough-going Radical,
and yet he was the heir to a fine estate, which had come down from
father to son for four hundred years! There was something captivating
about his history and adventures, especially as just at the time of
the election he became engaged to an heiress, who died a month before
the marriage should have taken place. She died without a will, and
her money all went to some third cousins.

George Vavasor bore this last disappointment like a man, and it was
at this time that he again became fully reconciled to his cousin.
Previous to this they had met; and Alice, at her cousin Kate's
instigation, had induced her father to meet him. But at first there
had been no renewal of real friendship. Alice had given her cordial
assent to her cousin's marriage with the heiress, Miss Grant, telling
Kate that such an engagement was the very thing to put him thoroughly
on his feet. And then she had been much pleased by his spirit at that
Chelsea election. "It was grand of him, wasn't it?" said Kate, her
eyes brimming full of tears. "It was very spirited," said Alice. "If
you knew all, you would say so. They could get no one else to stand
but that Mr. Travers, and he wouldn't come forward, unless they would
guarantee all his expenses." "I hope it didn't cost George much,"
said Alice. "It did, though; nearly all he had got. But what matters?
Money's nothing to him, except for its uses. My own little mite is
my own now, and he shall have every farthing of it for the next
election, even though I should go out as a housemaid the next day."
There must have been something great about George Vavasor, or he
would not have been so idolized by such a girl as his sister Kate.

Early in the present spring, before the arrangements for the Swiss
journey were made, George Vavasor had spoken to Alice about that
intended marriage which had been broken off by the lady's death. He
was sitting one evening with his cousin in the drawing-room in Queen
Anne Street, waiting for Kate, who was to join him there before going
to some party. I wonder whether Kate had had a hint from her brother
to be late! At any rate, the two were together for an hour, and the
talk had been all about himself. He had congratulated her on her
engagement with Mr. Grey, which had just become known to him, and had
then spoken of his own last intended marriage.

"I grieved for her," he said, "greatly."

"I'm sure you did, George."

"Yes, I did;--for her, herself. Of course the world has given me
credit for lamenting the loss of her money. But the truth is, that as
regards both herself and her money, it is much better for me that we
were never married."

"Do you mean even though she should have lived?"

"Yes;--even had she lived."

"And why so? If you liked her, her money was surely no drawback."

"No; not if I had liked her."

"And did you not like her?"

"No."

"Oh, George!"

"I did not love her as a man should love his wife, if you mean that.
As for my liking her, I did like her. I liked her very much."

"But you would have loved her?"

"I don't know. I don't find that task of loving so very easy. It
might have been that I should have learned to hate her."

"If so, it is better for you, and better for her, that she has gone."

"It is better. I am sure of it. And yet I grieve for her, and in
thinking of her I almost feel as though I were guilty of her death."

"But she never suspected that you did not love her?"

"Oh no. But she was not given to think much of such things. She took
all that for granted. Poor girl! she is at rest now, and her money
has gone, where it should go, among her own relatives."

"Yes; with such feelings as yours are about her, her money would have
been a burden to you."

"I would not have taken it. I hope, at least, that I would not have
taken it. Money is a sore temptation, especially to a poor man like
me. It is well for me that the trial did not come in my way."

"But you are not such a very poor man now, are you, George? I thought
your business was a good one."

"It is, and I have no right to be a poor man. But a man will be poor
who does such mad things as I do. I had three or four thousand pounds
clear, and I spent every shilling of it on the Chelsea election.
Goodness knows whether I shall have a shilling at all when another
chance comes round; but if I have I shall certainly spend it, and
if I have not, I shall go in debt wherever I can raise a hundred
pounds."

"I hope you will be successful at last."

"I feel sure that I shall. But, in the mean time, I can not but know
that my career is perfectly reckless. No woman ought to join her lot
to mine unless she has within her courage to be as reckless as I am.
You know what men do when they toss up for shillings?"

"Yes, I suppose I do."

"I am tossing up every day of my life for every shilling that I
have."

"Do you mean that you're--gambling?"

"No. I have given that up altogether. I used to gamble, but I never
do that now, and never shall again. What I mean is this,--that I hold
myself in readiness to risk everything at any moment, in order to
gain any object that may serve my turn. I am always ready to lead a
forlorn hope. That's what I mean by tossing up every day for every
shilling that I have."

Alice did not quite understand him, and perhaps he did not intend
that she should. Perhaps his object was to mystify her imagination.
She did not understand him, but I fear that she admired the kind of
courage which he professed. And he had not only professed it: in that
matter of the past election he had certainly practised it.

In talking of beauty to his sister he had spoken of himself as being
ugly. He would not generally have been called ugly by women, had not
one side of his face been dreadfully scarred by a cicatrice, which in
healing, had left a dark indented line down from his left eye to his
lower jaw. That black ravine running through his cheek was certainly
ugly. On some occasions, when he was angry or disappointed, it was
very hideous; for he would so contort his face that the scar would,
as it were, stretch itself out, revealing all its horrors, and his
countenance would become all scar. "He looked at me like the devil
himself--making the hole in his face gape at me," the old squire
had said to John Vavasor in describing the interview in which the
grandson had tried to bully his grandfather into assenting to his own
views about the mortgage. But in other respects George's face was not
ugly, and might have been thought handsome by many women. His hair
was black, and was parted in the front. His forehead, though low,
was broad. His eyes were dark and bright, and his eyebrows were very
full, and perfectly black. At those periods of his anger, all his
face which was not scar, was eye and eyebrow. He wore a thick black
moustache, which covered his mouth, but no whiskers. People said of
him that he was so proud of his wound that he would not grow a hair
to cover it. The fact, however, was that no whisker could be made to
come sufficiently forward to be of service, and therefore he wore
none.

The story of that wound should be told. When he was yet hardly more
than a boy, before he had come up to London, he was living in a
house in the country which his father then occupied. At the time
his father was absent, and he and his sister only were in the house
with the maid-servants. His sister had a few jewels in her room, and
an exaggerated report of them having come to the ears of certain
enterprising burglars, a little plan was arranged for obtaining them.
A small boy was hidden in the house, a window was opened, and at the
proper witching hour of night a stout individual crept up-stairs in
his stocking-feet, and was already at Kate Vavasor's door,--when,
in the dark, dressed only in his nightshirt, wholly unarmed, George
Vavasor flew at the fellow's throat. Two hours elapsed before the
horror-stricken women of the house could bring men to the place.
George's face had then been ripped open from the eye downwards, with
some chisel, or house-breaking instrument. But the man was dead.
George had wrenched from him his own tool, and having first jabbed
him all over with insufficient wounds, had at last driven the steel
through his windpipe. The small boy escaped, carrying with him two
shillings and threepence which Kate had left upon the drawing-room
mantelpiece.

George Vavasor was rather low in stature, but well made, with small
hands and feet, but broad in the chest and strong in the loins. He
was a fine horseman and a hard rider; and men who had known him well
said that he could fence and shoot with a pistol as few men care to
do in these peaceable days. Since volunteering had come up, he had
become a captain of Volunteers, and had won prizes with his rifle at
Wimbledon.

Such had been the life of George Vavasor, and such was his character,
and such his appearance. He had always lived alone in London, and did
so at present; but just now his sister was much with him, as she was
staying up in town with an aunt, another Vavasor by birth, with whom
the reader will, if he persevere, become acquainted in course of
time. I hope he will persevere a little, for of all the Vavasors Mrs.
Greenow was perhaps the best worth knowing. But Kate Vavasor's home
was understood to be in her grandfather's house in Westmoreland.

On the evening before they started for Switzerland, George and Kate
walked from Queen Anne Street, where they had been dining with Alice,
to Mrs. Greenow's house. Everything had been settled about luggage,
hours of starting, and routes as regarded their few first days;
and the common purse had been made over to George. That portion of
Mr. Grey's letter had been read which alluded to the Paynims and
the glasses of water, and everything had passed in the best of
good-humour. "I'll endeavour to get the cold water for you," George
had said; "but as to the breakfasts, I can only hope you won't put
me to severe trials by any very early hours. When people go out for
pleasure it should be pleasure."

The brother and sister walked through two or three streets in
silence, and then Kate asked a question.

"George, I wonder what your wishes really are about Alice?"

"That she shouldn't want her breakfast too early while we are away."

"That means that I'm to hold my tongue, of course."

"No, it doesn't."

"Then it means that you intend to hold yours."

"No; not that either."

"Then what does it mean?"

"That I have no fixed wishes on the subject. Of course she'll marry
this man John Grey, and then no one will hear another word about
her."

"She will no doubt, if you don't interfere. Probably she will whether
you interfere or not. But if you wish to interfere--"

"She's got four hundred a year, and is not so good-looking as she
was."

"Yes; she has got four hundred a year, and she is more handsome now
than ever she was. I know that you think so;--and that you love her
and love no one else--unless you have a sneaking fondness for me."

"I'll leave you to judge of that last."

"And as for me,--I only love two people in the world; her and you. If
ever you mean to try, you should try now."




CHAPTER V.

The Balcony at Basle.


I am not going to describe the Vavasors' Swiss tour. It would not be
fair on my readers. "Six Weeks in the Bernese Oberland, by party of
three," would have but very small chance of success in the literary
world at present, and I should consider myself to be dishonest if
I attempt to palm off such matter on the public in the pages of a
novel. It is true that I have just returned from Switzerland, and
should find such a course of writing very convenient. But I dismiss
the temptation, strong as it is. _Retro age, Satanas._ No living man
or woman any longer wants to be told anything of the Grimsell or
of the Gemmi. Ludgate Hill is now-a-days more interesting than the
Jungfrau.

The Vavasors were not very energetic on their tour. As George had
said, they had gone out for pleasure and not for work. They went
direct to Interlaken and then hung about between that place and
Grindelwald and Lauterbrunnen, It delighted him to sit still on some
outer bench, looking at the mountains, with a cigar in his mouth,
and it seemed to delight them to be with him. Much that Mr. Grey
prophesied had come true. The two girls were ministers to him,
instead of having him as their slave.

"What fine fellows those Alpine club men think themselves," he said
on one of these occasions, "and how thoroughly they despise the sort
of enjoyment I get from mountains. But they're mistaken."

"I don't see why either need be mistaken," said Alice.

"But they are mistaken," he continued. "They rob the mountains of
their poetry, which is or should be their greatest charm. Mont Blanc
can have no mystery for a man who has been up it half a dozen times.
It's like getting behind the scenes at a ballet, or making a conjuror
explain his tricks."

"But is the exercise nothing?" said Kate.

"Yes; the exercise is very fine;--but that avoids the question."

"And they all botanize," said Alice.

"I don't believe it. I believe that the most of them simply walk
up the mountain and down again. But if they did, that avoids the
question also. The poetry and mystery of the mountains are lost to
those who make themselves familiar with their details, not the less
because such familiarity may have useful results. In this world
things are beautiful only because they are not quite seen, or not
perfectly understood. Poetry is precious chiefly because it suggests
more than it declares. Look in there, through that valley, where you
just see the distant little peak at the end. Are you not dreaming
of the unknown beautiful world that exists up there;--beautiful, as
heaven is beautiful, because you know nothing of the reality? If you
make your way up there and back to-morrow, and find out all about it,
do you mean to say that it will be as beautiful to you when you come
back?"

"Yes;--I think it would," said Alice.

"Then you've no poetry in you. Now I'm made up of poetry." After that
they began to laugh at him and were very happy.

I think that Mr. Grey was right in answering Alice's letter as he did;
but I think that Lady Macleod was also right in saying that Alice
should not have gone to Switzerland in company with George Vavasor. A
peculiar familiarity sprang up, which, had all its circumstances been
known to Mr. Grey, would not have entirely satisfied him, even though
no word was said which might in itself have displeased him. During
the first weeks of their travelling no word was said which would
have displeased him; but at last, when the time for their return was
drawing nigh, when their happiness was nearly over, and that feeling
of melancholy was coming on them which always pervades the last hours
of any period that has been pleasant,--then words became softer than
they had been, and references were made to old days,--allusions which
never should have been permitted between them.

Alice had been very happy,--more happy perhaps in that she had been
a joint minister with Kate to her cousin George's idle fantasies,
than she would have been hurrying about with him as her slave. They
had tacitly agreed to spoil him with comforts; and girls are always
happier in spoiling some man than in being spoiled by men. And he had
taken it all well, doing his despotism pleasantly, exacting much,
but exacting nothing that was disagreeable. And he had been amusing
always, as Alice thought without any effort. But men and women, when
they show themselves at their best, seldom do so without an effort.
If the object be near the heart the effort will be pleasant to him
who makes it, and if it be made well, it will be hidden; but, not the
less, will the effort be there. George Vavasor had on the present
occasion done his very best to please his cousin.

They were sitting at Basle one evening in the balcony of the big
hotel which overlooks the Rhine. The balcony runs the length of the
house, and is open to all the company; but it is spacious, and little
parties can be formed there with perfect privacy. The swift broad
Rhine runs underneath, rushing through from the bridge which here
spans the river; and every now and then on summer evenings loud
shouts come up from strong swimmers in the water, who are glorying
in the swiftness of the current. The three were sitting there, by
themselves, at the end of the balcony. Coffee was before them on a
little table, and George's cigar, as usual, was in his mouth.

"It's nearly all over," said he, after they had remained silent for
some minutes.

"And I do think it has been a success," said Kate. "Always excepting
about the money. I'm ruined for ever."

"I'll make your money all straight," said George.

"Indeed you'll do nothing of the kind," said Kate. "I'm ruined, but
you are ruineder. But what signifies? It is such a great thing ever
to have had six weeks' happiness, that the ruin is, in point of fact,
a good speculation. What do you say, Alice? Won't you vote, too, that
we've done it well?"

"I think we've done it very well. I have enjoyed myself thoroughly."

"And now you've got to go home to John Grey and Cambridgeshire! It's
no wonder you should be melancholy." That was the thought in Kate's
mind, but she did not speak it out on this occasion.

"That's good of you, Alice," said Kate. "Is it not, George? I like a
person who will give a hearty meed of approbation."

"But I am giving the meed of approbation to myself."

"I like a person even to do that heartily," said Kate. "Not that
George and I are thankful for the compliment. We are prepared to
admit that we owe almost everything to you,--are we not, George?"

"I'm not; by any means," said George.

"Well, I am, and I expect to have something pretty said to me in
return. Have I been cross once, Alice?"

"No; I don't think you have. You are never cross, though you are
often ferocious."

"But I haven't been once ferocious,--nor has George."

"He would have been the most ungrateful man alive if he had," said
Alice. "We've done nothing since we've started but realize from him
that picture in 'Punch' of the young gentleman at Jeddo who had a
dozen ladies to wait upon him."

"And now he has got to go home to his lodgings, and wait upon himself
again. Poor fellow! I do pity you, George."

"No, you don't;--nor does Alice. I believe girls always think that
a bachelor in London has the happiest of all lives. It's because
they think so that they generally want to put an end to the man's
condition."

"It's envy that makes us want to get married,--not love," said Kate.

"It's the devil in some shape, as often as not," said he. "With a
man, marriage always seems to him to be an evil at the instant."

"Not always," said Alice.

"Almost always;--but he does it, as he takes physic, because
something worse will come if he don't. A man never likes having his
tooth pulled out, but all men do have their teeth pulled out,--and
they who delay it too long suffer the very mischief."

"I do like George's philosophy," said Kate, getting up from her chair
as she spoke; "it is so sharp, and has such a pleasant acid taste
about it; and then we all know that it means nothing. Alice, I'm
going up-stairs to begin the final packing."

"I'll come with you, dear."

"No, don't. To tell the truth I'm only going into that man's room
because he won't put up a single thing of his own decently. We'll
do ours, of course, when we go up to bed. Whatever you disarrange
to-night, Master George, you must rearrange for yourself to-morrow
morning, for I promise I won't go into your room at five o'clock."

"How I do hate that early work," said George.

"I'll be down again very soon," said Kate. "Then we'll take one turn
on the bridge and go to bed."

Alice and George were left together sitting in the balcony. They
had been alone together before many times since their travels had
commenced; but they both of them felt that there was something to
them in the present moment different from any other period of their
journey. There was something that each felt to be sweet, undefinable,
and dangerous. Alice had known that it would be better for her to go
up-stairs with Kate; but Kate's answer had been of such a nature that
had she gone she would have shown that she had some special reason
for going. Why should she show such a need? Or why, indeed, should
she entertain it?

Alice was seated quite at the end of the gallery, and Kate's chair
was at her feet in the corner. When Alice and Kate had seated
themselves, the waiter had brought a small table for the coffee-cups,
and George had placed his chair on the other side of that. So that
Alice was, as it were, a prisoner. She could not slip away without
some special preparation for going, and Kate had so placed her chair
in leaving, that she must actually have asked George to move it
before she could escape. But why should she wish to escape? Nothing
could be more lovely and enticing than the scene before her. The
night had come on, with quick but still unperceived approach, as it
does in those parts; for the twilight there is not prolonged as it is
with us more northern folk. The night had come on, but there was a
rising moon, which just sufficed to give a sheen to the water beneath
her. The air was deliciously soft;--of that softness which produces
no sensation either of warmth or cold, but which just seems to touch
one with loving tenderness, as though the unseen spirits of the air
kissed one's forehead as they passed on their wings. The Rhine was
running at her feet, so near, that in the soft half light it seemed
as though she might step into its ripple. The Rhine was running
by with that delicious sound of rapidly moving waters, that fresh
refreshing gurgle of the river, which is so delicious to the ear at
all times. If you be talking, it wraps up your speech, keeping it for
yourselves, making it difficult neither to her who listens nor to him
who speaks. If you would sleep, it is of all lullabies the sweetest.
If you are alone and would think, it aids all your thoughts. If
you are alone, and, alas! would not think,--if thinking be too
painful,--it will dispel your sorrow, and give the comfort which
music alone can give. Alice felt that the air kissed her, that
the river sang for her its sweetest song, that the moon shone for
her with its softest light,--that light which lends the poetry of
half-developed beauty to everything that it touches. Why should she
leave it?

Nothing was said for some minutes after Kate's departure, and Alice
was beginning to shake from her that half feeling of danger which had
come over her. Vavasor had sat back in his chair, leaning against
the house, with his feet raised upon a stool; his arms were folded
across his breast, and he seemed to have divided himself between
his thoughts and his cigar. Alice was looking full upon the river,
and her thoughts had strayed away to her future home among John
Grey's flower-beds and shrubs; but the river, though it sang to her
pleasantly, seemed to sing a song of other things than such a home as
that,--a song full of mystery, as are all river songs when one tries
to understand their words.

"When are you to be married, Alice?" said George at last.

"Oh, George!" said she. "You ask me a question as though you were
putting a pistol to my ear."

"I'm sorry the question was so unpleasant."

"I didn't say that it was unpleasant; but you asked it so suddenly!
The truth is, I didn't expect you to speak at all just then. I
suppose I was thinking of something."

"But if it be not unpleasant,--when are you to be married?"

"I do not know. It is not fixed."

"But about when, I mean? This summer?"

"Certainly not this summer, for the summer will be over when we reach
home."

"This winter? Next spring? Next year?--or in ten years' time?"

"Before the expiration of the ten years, I suppose. Anything more
exact than that I can't say."

"I suppose you like it?" he then said.

"What, being married? You see I've never tried yet."

"The idea of it,--the anticipation, You look forward with
satisfaction to the kind of life you will lead at Nethercoats? Don't
suppose I am saying anything against it, for I have no conception
what sort of a place Nethercoats is. On the whole I don't know that
there is any kind of life better than that of an English country
gentleman in his own place;--that is, if he can keep it up, and not
live as the old squire does, in a state of chronic poverty."

"Mr. Grey's place doesn't entitle him to be called a country
gentleman."

"But you like the prospect of it?"

"Oh, George, how you do cross-question one! Of course I like it, or
I shouldn't have accepted it."

"That does not follow. But I quite acknowledge that I have no right
to cross-question you. If I ever had such right on the score of
cousinship, I have lost it on the score of--; but we won't mind that,
will we, Alice?" To this she at first made no answer, but he repeated
the question. "Will we, Alice?"

"Will we what?"

"Recur to the old days."

"Why should we recur to them? They are passed, and as we are again
friends and dear cousins the sting of them is gone."

"Ah, yes! The sting of them is gone. It is for that reason, because
it is so, that we may at last recur to them without danger. If we
regret nothing,--if neither of us has anything to regret, why not
recur to them, and talk of them freely?"

"No, George; that would not do."

"By heavens, no! It would drive me mad; and if I know aught of you,
it would hardly leave you as calm as you are at present."

"As I would wish to be left calm--"

"Would you? Then I suppose I ought to hold my tongue. But, Alice, I
shall never have the power of speaking to you again as I speak now.
Since we have been out together, we have been dear friends; is it not
so?"

"And shall we not always be dear friends?"

"No, certainly not. How will it be possible? Think of it. How can I
really be your friend when you are the mistress of that man's house
in Cambridgeshire?"

"George!"

"I mean nothing disrespectful. I truly beg your pardon if it
has seemed so. Let me say that gentleman's house;--for he is a
gentleman."

"That he certainly is."

"You could not have accepted him were he not so. But how can I be
your friend when you are his wife? I may still call you cousin Alice,
and pat your children on the head if I chance to see them; and shall
stop in the streets and shake hands with him if I meet him;--that is
if my untoward fate does not induce him to cut my acquaintance;--but
as for friendship, that will be over when you and I shall have parted
next Thursday evening at London Bridge."

"Oh, George, don't say so!"

"But I do."

"And why on Thursday? Do you mean that you won't come to Queen Anne
Street any more?"

"Yes, that is what I do mean. This trip of ours has been very
successful, Kate says. Perhaps Kate knows nothing about it."

"It has been very pleasant,--at least to me."

"And the pleasure has had no drawback?"

"None to me."

"It has been very pleasant to me, also;--but the pleasure has had its
alloy. Alice, I have nothing to ask from you,--nothing."

"Anything that you should ask, I would do for you."

"I have nothing to ask;--nothing. But I have one word to say."

"George, do not say it. Let me go up-stairs. Let me go to Kate."

"Certainly; if you wish it you shall go." He still held his foot
against the chair which barred her passage, and did not attempt to
rise as he must have done to make way for her passage out. "Certainly
you shall go to Kate, if you refuse to hear me. But after all
that has passed between us, after these six weeks of intimate
companionship, I think you ought to listen to me. I tell you that I
have nothing to ask. I am not going to make love to you."

Alice had commenced some attempt to rise, but she had again settled
herself in her chair. And now, when he paused for a moment, she made
no further sign that she wished to escape, nor did she say a word to
intimate her further wish that he should be silent.

"I am not going to make love to you," he said again. "As for making
love, as the word goes, that must be over between you and me. It has
been made and marred, and can not be remade. It may exist, or it may
have been expelled; but where it does not exist, it will never be
brought back again."

"It should not be spoken of between you and me."

"So, no doubt, any proper-going duenna would say, and so, too, little
children should be told; but between you and me there can be no
necessity for falsehood. We have grown beyond our sugar-toothed ages,
and are now men and women. I perfectly understood your breaking away
from me. I understood you, and in spite of my sorrow knew that you
were right. I am not going to accuse or to defend myself; but I knew
that you were right."

"Then let there be no more about it."

"Yes; there must be more about it. I did not understand you when you
accepted Mr. Grey. Against him I have not a whisper to make. He may
be perfect for aught I know. But, knowing you as I thought I did, I
could not understand your loving such a man as him. It was as though
one who had lived on brandy should take himself suddenly to a milk
diet,--and enjoy the change! A milk diet is no doubt the best. But
men who have lived on brandy can't make those changes very suddenly.
They perish in the attempt."

"Not always, George."

"It may be done with months of agony;--but there was no such agony
with you."

"Who can tell?"

"But you will tell me the cure was made. I thought so, and therefore
thought that I should find you changed. I thought that you, who had
been all fire, would now have turned yourself into soft-flowing milk
and honey, and have become fit for the life in store for you. With
such a one I might have travelled from Moscow to Malta without
danger. The woman fit to be John Grey's wife would certainly do
me no harm,--could not touch my happiness. I might have loved her
once,--might still love the memory of what she had been; but her, in
her new form, after her new birth,--such a one as that, Alice, could
be nothing to me. Don't mistake me. I have enough of wisdom in me to
know how much better, ay, and happier a woman she might be. It was
not that I thought you had descended in the scale; but I gave you
credit for virtues which you have not acquired. Alice, that wholesome
diet of which I spoke is not your diet. You would starve on it, and
perish."

He had spoken with great energy, but still in a low voice, having
turned full round upon the table, with both his arms upon it, and his
face stretched out far over towards her. She was looking full at him;
and, as I have said before, that scar and his gloomy eyes and thick
eyebrows seemed to make up the whole of his face. But the scar had
never been ugly to her. She knew the story, and when he was her lover
she had taken pride in the mark of the wound. She looked at him, but
though he paused she did not speak. The music of the river was still
in her ears, and there came upon her a struggle as though she were
striving to understand its song. Were the waters also telling her of
the mistake she had made in accepting Mr. Grey as her husband? What
her cousin was now telling her,--was it not a repetition of words
which she had spoken to herself hundreds of times during the last
two months? Was she not telling herself daily,--hourly,--always,--in
every thought of her life, that in accepting Mr. Grey she had assumed
herself to be mistress of virtues which she did not possess? Had
she not, in truth, rioted upon brandy, till the innocence of milk
was unfitted for her? This man now came and rudely told her all
this,--but did he not tell her the truth? She sat silent and
convicted; only gazing into his face when his speech was done.

"I have learned this since we have been again together, Alice; and
finding you, not the angel I had supposed, finding you to be the same
woman I had once loved,--the safety that I anticipated has not fallen
to my lot. That's all. Here's Kate, and now we'll go for our walk."




CHAPTER VI.

The Bridge over the Rhine.


"George," said Kate, speaking before she quite got up to them, "will
you tell me whether you have been preparing all your things for an
open sale by auction?" Then she stole a look at Alice, and having
learned from that glance that something had occurred which prevented
Alice from joining her in her raillery, she went on with it herself
rapidly, as though to cover Alice's confusion, and give her time to
rally before they should all move. "Would you believe it? he had
three razors laid out on his table--"

"A man must shave,--even at Basle."

"But not with three razors at once; and three hair-brushes, and
half a dozen toothbrushes, and a small collection of combs, and
four or five little glass bottles, looking as though they contained
poison,--all with silver tops. I can only suppose you desired to
startle the weak mind of the chambermaid. I have put them all up; but
remember this, if they are taken out again you are responsible. And
I will not put up your boots, George. What can you have wanted with
three pairs of boots at Basle?"

"When you have completed the list of my wardrobe we'll go out upon
the bridge. That is, if Alice likes it."

"Oh, yes; I shall like it."

"Come along then," said Kate. And so they moved away. When they got
upon the bridge Alice and Kate were together, while George strolled
behind them, close to them, but not taking any part in their
conversation,--as though he had merely gone with them as an escort.
Kate seemed to be perfectly content with this arrangement, chattering
to Alice, so that she might show that there was nothing serious on
the minds of any of them. It need hardly be said that Alice at this
time made no appeal to George to join them. He followed them at their
heels, with his hands behind his back, looking down upon the pavement
and simply waiting upon their pleasure.

"Do you know," said Kate, "I have a very great mind to run away."

"Where do you want to run to?"

"Well;--that wouldn't much signify. Perhaps I'd go to the little inn
at Handek. It's a lonely place, where nobody would hear of me,--and I
should have the waterfall. I'm afraid they'd want to have their bill
paid. That would be the worst of it."

"But why run away just now?"

"I won't, because you wouldn't like going home with George
alone,--and I suppose he'd be bound to look after me, as he's doing
now. I wonder what he thinks of having to walk over the bridge after
us girls. I suppose he'd be in that place down there drinking beer,
if we weren't here."

"If he wanted to go, I dare say he would, in spite of us."

"That's ungrateful of you, for I'm sure we've never been kept in a
moment by his failing us. But as I was saying, I do dread going home.
You are going to John Grey, which may be pleasant enough; but I'm
going--to Aunt Greenow."

"It's your own choice."

"No, it's not. I haven't any choice in the matter. Of course I might
refuse to speak to Aunt Greenow, and nobody could make me;--but
practically I haven't any choice in the matter. Fancy a month at
Yarmouth with no companion but such a woman as that!"

"I shouldn't mind it. Aunt Greenow always seems to me to be a very
good sort of woman."

"She may be a good woman, but I must say I think she's of a bad sort.
You've never heard her talk about her husband?"

"No, never; I think she did cry a little the first day she came to
Queen Anne Street, but that wasn't unnatural."

"He was thirty years older than herself."

"But still he was her husband. And even if her tears are assumed,
what of that? What's a woman to do? Of course she was wrong to marry
him. She was thirty-five, and had nothing, while he was sixty-five,
and was very rich. According to all accounts she made him a very good
wife, and now that she's got all his money, you wouldn't have her go
about laughing within three months of his death."

"No; I wouldn't have her laugh; but neither would I have her cry.
And she's quite right to wear weeds; but she needn't be so very
outrageous in the depth of her hems, or so very careful that her caps
are becoming. Her eyes will be worn out by their double service. They
are always red with weeping, and yet she is ready every minute with a
full battery of execution for any man that she sees."

"Then why have you consented to go to Yarmouth with her?"

"Just because she's got forty thousand pounds. If Mr. Greenow had left
her with a bare maintenance I don't suppose I should ever have held
out my hand to her."

"Then you're as bad as she is."

"Quite as bad;--and that's what makes me want to run away. But it
isn't my own fault altogether. It's the fault of the world at large.
Does anybody ever drop their rich relatives? When she proposed to
take me to Yarmouth, wasn't it natural that the squire should ask me
to go? When I told George, wasn't it natural that he should say, 'Oh,
go by all means. She's got forty thousand pounds!' One can't pretend
to be wiser or better than one's relatives. And after all what can I
expect from her money?"

"Nothing, I should say."

"Not a halfpenny. I'm nearly thirty and she's only forty, and of
course she'll marry again. I will say of myself, too, that no person
living cares less for money."

"I should think no one."

"Yet one sticks to one's rich relatives. It's the way of the world."
Then she paused a moment. "But shall I tell you, Alice, why I do
stick to her? Perhaps you'll think the object as mean as though I
wanted her money myself."

"Why is it?"

"Because it is on the cards that she may help George in his career. I
do not want money, but he may. And for such purposes as his, I think
it fair that all the family should contribute. I feel sure that he
would make a name for himself in Parliament; and if I had my way I
would spend every shilling of Vavasor money in putting him there.
When I told the squire so I thought he would have eaten me. I really
did think he would have turned me out of the house."

"And serve you right too after what had happened."

"I didn't care. Let him turn me out. I was determined he should know
what I thought. He swore at me; and then he was so unhappy at what
he had done that he came and kissed me that night in my bedroom, and
gave me a ten-pound note. What do you think I did with it? I sent it
as a contribution to the next election and George has it now locked
up in a box. Don't you tell him that I told you."

Then they stopped and leaned for a while over the parapet of the
bridge. "Come here, George," said Kate; and she made room for him
between herself and Alice. "Wouldn't you like to be swimming down
there as those boys were doing when we went out into the balcony? The
water looks so enticing."

"I can't say I should;--unless it might be a pleasant way of swimming
into the next world."

"I should so like to feel myself going with the stream," said Kate;
"particularly by this light. I can't fancy in the least that I should
be drowned."

"I can't fancy anything else," said Alice.

"It would be so pleasant to feel the water gliding along one's limbs,
and to be carried away headlong,--knowing that you were on the direct
road to Rotterdam."

"And so arrive there without your clothes," said George.

"They would be brought after in a boat. Didn't you see that those
boys had a boat with them? But if I lived here, I'd never do it
except by moonlight. The water looks so clear and bright now, and the
rushing sound of it is so soft! The sea at Yarmouth won't be anything
like that I suppose."

Neither of them any longer answered her, and yet she went on talking
about the river, and their aunt, and her prospects at Yarmouth.
Neither of them answered her, and yet it seemed that they had not a
word to say to each other. But still they stood there looking down
upon the river, and every now and then Kate's voice was to be heard,
preventing the feeling which might otherwise have arisen that their
hearts were too full for speech.

At last Alice seemed to shiver. There was a slight trembling in her
arms, which George felt rather than saw. "You are cold," he said.

"No indeed."

"If you are let us go in. I thought you shivered with the night air."

"It wasn't that. I was thinking of something. Don't you ever think of
things that make you shiver?"

"Indeed I do, very often;--so often that I have to do my shiverings
inwardly. Otherwise people would think I had the palsy."

"I don't mean things of moment," said Alice. "Little bits of things
make me do it;--perhaps a word that I said and ought not to have said
ten years ago;--the most ordinary little mistakes, even my own past
thoughts to myself about the merest trifles. They are always making
me shiver."

"It's not because you have committed any murder then."

"No; but it's my conscience all the same, I suppose."

"Ah! I'm not so good as you. I doubt it's not my conscience at all.
When I think of a chance I've let go by, as I have thousands, then it
is that I shiver. But, as I tell you, I shiver inwardly. I've been in
one long shiver ever since we came out because of one chance that I
let go by. Come, we'll go in. We've to be up at five o'clock, and now
it's eleven. I'll do the rest of my shivering in bed."

"Are you tired of being out?" said Kate, when the other two began to
move.

"Not tired of being out, but George reminds me that we have to be up
at five."

"I wish George would hold his tongue. We can't come to the bridge
at Basle every night in our lives. If one found oneself at the top
of Sinai I'm afraid the first feeling would be one of fear lest one
wouldn't be down in time to dress for dinner. Are you aware, George,
that the king of rivers is running beneath your feet, and that the
moon is shining with a brilliance you never see at home?"

"I'll stay here all night if you'll put off going to-morrow," said
George.

"Our money wouldn't hold out," said Kate.

"Don't talk about Sinai any more after that," said he, "but let's go
in to bed."

They walked across the bridge back to the hotel in the same manner as
before, the two girls going together with the young man after them,
and so they went up the front steps of the hotel, through the hall,
and on to the stairs. Here George handed Alice her candle, and as he
did so he whispered a few words to her. "My shivering fit has to come
yet," said he, "and will last me the whole night." She would have
given much to be able to answer him lightly, as though what he had
said had meant nothing;--but she couldn't do it; the light speech
would not come to her. She was conscious of all this, and went away
to her own room without answering him at all. Here she sat down at
the window looking out upon the river till Kate should join her.
Their rooms opened through from one to the other, and she would not
begin her packing till her cousin should come.

But Kate had gone with her brother, promising, as she did so, that
she would be back in half a minute. That half minute was protracted
beyond half an hour. "If you'll take my advice," said Kate, at last,
standing up with her candle in her hand, "you'll ask her in plain
words to give you another chance. Do it to-morrow at Strasbourg;
you'll never have a better opportunity."

"And bid her throw John Grey over!"

"Don't say anything about John Grey; leave her to settle that matter
with herself. Believe me that she has quite courage enough to dispose
of John Grey, if she has courage enough to accept your offer."

"Kate, you women never understand each other. If I were to do that,
all her most powerful feelings would be arrayed in arms against me.
I must leave her to find out first that she wishes to be rid of her
engagement."

"She has found that out long ago. Do you think I don't know what she
wishes? But if you can't bring yourself to speak to her, she'll marry
him in spite of her wishes."

"Bring myself! I've never been very slow in bringing myself to speak
to any one when there was need. It isn't very pleasant sometimes, but
I do it, if I find occasion."

"But surely it must be pleasant with her. You must be glad to find
that she still loves you. You still love her, I suppose?"

"Upon my word I don't know."

"Don't provoke me, George. I'm moving heaven and earth to bring you
two together; but if I didn't think you loved her, I'd go to her at
once and bid her never see you again."

"Upon my word, Kate, I sometimes think it would be better if you'd
leave heaven and earth alone."

"Then I will. But of all human beings, surely you're the most
ungrateful."

"Why shouldn't she marry John Grey if she likes him?"

"But she doesn't like him. And I hate him. I hate the sound of his
voice, and the turn of his eye, and that slow, steady movement of
his,--as though he was always bethinking himself that he wouldn't
wear out his clothes."

"I don't see that your hating him ought to have anything to do with
it."

"If you're going to preach morals, I'll leave you. It's the darling
wish of my heart that she should be your wife. If you ever loved
anybody,--and I sometimes doubt whether you ever did,--but if you
did, you loved her."

"Did and do are different things."

"Very well, George; then I have done. It has been the same in every
twist and turn of my life. In everything that I have striven to do
for you, you have thrown yourself over, in order that I might be
thrown over too. But I believe you say this merely to vex me."

"Upon my word, Kate, I think you'd better go to bed."

"But not till I've told her everything. I won't leave her to be
deceived and ill-used again."

"Who is ill-using her now? Is it not the worst of ill-usage, trying
to separate her from that man?"

"No;--if I thought so, I would have no hand in doing it. She would
be miserable with him, and make him miserable as well. She does not
really love him. He loves her, but I've nothing to do with that. It's
nothing to me if he breaks his heart."

"I shall break mine if you don't let me go to bed."

With that she went away and hurried along the corridor, till she came
to her cousin's room. She found Alice still seated at the window, or
rather kneeling on the chair, with her head out through the lattice.
"Why, you lazy creature," said Kate; "I declare you haven't touched a
thing."

"You said we'd do it together."

"But he has kept me. Oh, what a man he is! If he ever does get
married, what will his wife do with him?"

"I don't think he ever will," said Alice.

"Don't you? I dare say you understand him better than I do. Sometimes
I think that the only thing wanting to make him thoroughly good, is a
wife. But it isn't every woman that would do for him. And the woman
who marries him should have high courage. There are moments with him
when he is very wild; but he never is cruel and never hard. Is Mr.
Grey ever hard?"

"Never; nor yet wild."

"Oh, certainly not that. I'm quite sure he's never wild."

"When you say that, Kate, I know that you mean to abuse him."

"No; upon my word. What's the good of abusing him to you? I like a
man to be wild,--wild in my sense. You knew that before."

"I wonder whether you'd like a wild man for yourself?"

"Ah! that's a question I've never asked myself. I've been often
curious to consider what sort of husband would suit you, but I've
had very few thoughts about a husband for myself. The truth is, I'm
married to George. Ever since--"

"Ever since what?"

"Since you and he were parted, I've had nothing to do in life but to
stick to him. And I shall do so to the end,--unless one thing should
happen."

"And what's that?"

"Unless you should become his wife after all. He will never marry
anybody else."

"Kate, you shouldn't allude to such a thing now. You know that it's
impossible."

"Well, perhaps so. As far as I'm concerned, it is all the better
for me. If George ever married, I should have nothing to do in the
world;--literally nothing--nothing--nothing--nothing!"

"Kate, don't talk in that way," and Alice came up to her and embraced
her.

"Go away," said she. "Go, Alice; you and I must part. I can not bear
it any longer. You must know it all. When you are married to John
Grey, our friendship must be over. If you became George's wife I
should become nobody. I've nothing else in the world. You and he
would be so all-sufficient for each other, that I should drop away
from you like an old garment. But I'd give up all, everything, every
hope I have, to see you become George's wife. I know myself not to
be good. I know myself to be very bad, and yet I care nothing for
myself. Don't Alice, don't; I don't want your caresses. Caress him,
and I'll kneel at your feet and cover them with kisses." She had now
thrown herself upon a sofa, and had turned her face away to the wall.

"Kate, you shouldn't speak in that way."

"Of course I shouldn't,--but I do."

"You, who know everything, must know that I can not marry your
brother,--even if he wished it."

"He does wish it."

"Not though I were under no other engagement."

"And why not?" said Kate, again starting up. "What is there to
separate you from George now, but that unfortunate affair, that will
end in the misery of you all. Do you think I can't see? Don't I know
which of the two men you like best?"

"You are making me sorry, Kate, that I have ventured to come here in
your brother's company. It is not only unkind of you to talk to me in
this way, but worse than that--it is indelicate."

"Oh, indelicate! How I do hate that word. If any word in the language
reminds me of a whited sepulchre it is that;--all clean and polished
outside with filth and rottenness within. Are your thoughts delicate?
that's the thing. You are engaged to marry John Grey. That may be
delicate enough if you love him truly, and feel yourself fitted to be
his wife; but it's about the most indelicate thing you can do, if you
love any one better than him. Delicacy with many women is like their
cleanliness. Nothing can be nicer than the whole outside get-up, but
you wouldn't wish to answer for anything beneath."

"If you think ill of me like that--"

"No; I don't think ill of you. How can I think ill of you when I know
that all your difficulties have come from him? It hasn't been your
fault; it has been his throughout. It is he who has driven you to
sacrifice yourself on this altar. If we can, both of us, manage to
lay aside all delicacy and pretence, and dare to speak the truth,
we shall acknowledge that it is so. Had Mr. Grey come to you while
things were smooth between you and George, would you have thought it
possible that he could be George's rival in your estimation? It is
Hyperion to Satyr."

"And which is the Satyr?"

"I'll leave your heart to tell you. You know what is the darling
wish of my heart. But, Alice, if I thought that Mr. Grey was to you
Hyperion,--if I thought that you could marry him with that sort of
worshipping, idolatrous love which makes a girl proud as well as
happy in her marriage, I wouldn't raise a little finger to prevent
it."

To this Alice made no answer, and then Kate allowed the matter to
drop. Alice made no answer, though she felt that she was allowing
judgement to go against her by default in not doing so. She had
intended to fight bravely, and to have maintained the excellence
of her present position as the affianced bride of Mr. Grey, but she
felt that she had failed. She felt that she had, in some sort,
acknowledged that the match was one to be deplored;--that her words
in her own defence would by no means have satisfied Mr. Grey, if Mr.
Grey could have heard them;--that they would have induced him to
offer her back her troth rather than have made him happy as a lover.
But she had nothing further to say. She could do something. She would
hurry home and bid him name the earliest day he pleased. After that
her cousin would cease to disturb her in her career.

It was nearly one o'clock before the two girls began to prepare for
their morning start, and Alice, when they had finished their packing,
seemed to be worn out with fatigue. "If you are tired, dear, we'll
put it off," said Kate. "Not for worlds," said Alice. "For half a
word we'll do it," continued Kate. "I'll slip out to George and tell
him, and there's nothing he'd like so much." But Alice would not
consent.

About two they got into bed, and punctually at six they were at the
railway station. "Don't speak to me," said George, when he met them
at their door in the passage. "I shall only yawn in your face."
However, they were in time,--which means abroad that they were at the
station half an hour before their train started,--and they went on
upon their journey to Strasbourg.

There is nothing further to be told of their tour. They were but two
days and nights on the road from Basle to London; and during those
two days and nights neither George nor Kate spoke a word to Alice of
her marriage, nor was any allusion made to the balcony at the inn, or
to the bridge over the river.




CHAPTER VII.

Aunt Greenow.


Kate Vavasor remained only three days in London before she started
for Yarmouth; and during those three days she was not much with her
cousin. "I'm my aunt's, body and soul, for the next six weeks," she
said to Alice, when she did come to Queen Anne Street on the morning
after her arrival. "And she is exigeant in a manner I can't at all
explain to you. You mustn't be surprised if I don't even write a
line. I've escaped by stealth now. She went up-stairs to try on some
new weeds for the seaside, and then I bolted." She did not say a
word about George; nor during those three days, nor for some days
afterwards, did George show himself. As it turned out afterwards, he
had gone off to Scotland, and had remained a week among the grouse.
Thus, at least, he had accounted for himself and his movements; but
all George Vavasor's friends knew that his goings out and comings in
were seldom accounted for openly like those of other men.

It will perhaps be as well to say a few words about Mrs. Greenow
before we go with her to Yarmouth. Mrs. Greenow was the only daughter
and the youngest child of the old squire at Vavasor Hall. She was
just ten years younger than her brother John, and I am inclined to
think that she was almost justified in her repeated assertion that
the difference was much greater than ten years, by the freshness of
her colour, and by the general juvenility of her appearance. She
certainly did not look forty, and who can expect a woman to proclaim
herself to be older than her looks? In early life she had been taken
from her father's house, and had lived with relatives in one of the
large towns in the north of England. It is certain she had not been
quite successful as a girl. Though she had enjoyed the name of being
a beauty, she had not the usual success which comes from such repute.
At thirty-four she was still unmarried. She had, moreover, acquired
the character of being a flirt; and I fear that the stories which
were told of her, though doubtless more than half false, had in
them sufficient of truth to justify the character. Now this was
very sad, seeing that Arabella Vavasor had no fortune, and that she
had offended her father and brothers by declining to comply with
their advice at certain periods of her career. There was, indeed,
considerable trouble in the minds of the various male Vavasors with
reference to Arabella, when tidings suddenly reached the Hall that
she was going to be married to an old man.

She was married to the old man; and the marriage fortunately turned
out satisfactorily, at any rate for the old man and for her family.
The Vavasors were relieved from all further trouble, and were as much
surprised as gratified when they heard that she did her duty well
in her new position. Arabella had long been a thorn in their side,
never having really done anything which they could pronounce to be
absolutely wrong, but always giving them cause for fear. Now they
feared no longer. Her husband was a retired merchant, very rich, not
very strong in health, and devoted to his bride. Rumours soon made
their way to Vavasor Hall, and to Queen Anne Street, that Mrs. Greenow
was quite a pattern wife, and that Mr. Greenow considered himself to
be the happiest old man in Lancashire. And now in her prosperity she
quite forgave the former slights which had been put upon her by her
relatives. She wrote to her dear niece Alice, and to her dearest
niece Kate, and sent little presents to her father. On one occasion
she took her husband to Vavasor Hall, and there was a regular renewal
of all the old family feelings. Arabella's husband was an old
man, and was very old for his age; but the whole thing was quite
respectable, and there was, at any rate, no doubt about the money.
Then Mr. Greenow died; and the widow, having proved the will, came up
to London and claimed the commiseration of her nieces.

"Why not go to Yarmouth with her for a month?" George had said to
Kate. "Of course it will be a bore. But an aunt with forty thousand
pounds has a right to claim attention." Kate acknowledged the truth
of the argument and agreed to go to Yarmouth for a month. "Your aunt
Arabella has shown herself to be a very sensible woman," the old
squire had written; "much more sensible than anybody thought her
before her marriage. Of course you should go with her if she asks
you." What aunt, uncle, or cousin, in the uncontrolled possession of
forty thousand pounds was ever unpopular in the family?

Yarmouth is not a very prepossessing place to the eye. To my eye,
at any rate, it is not so. There is an old town with which summer
visitors have little or nothing to do; and there are the new houses
down by the sea-side, to which, at any rate, belongs the full
advantage of sea air. A kind of esplanade runs for nearly a mile
along the sands, and there are built, or in the course of building,
rows of houses appropriated to summer visitors all looking out upon
the sea. There is no beauty unless the yellow sandy sea can be called
beautiful. The coast is low and straight, and the east wind blows
full upon it. But the place is healthy; and Mrs. Greenow was probably
right in thinking that she might there revive some portion of the
health which she had lost in watching beside the couch of her
departing lord.

"Omnibus;--no, indeed. Jeannette, get me a fly." These were the first
words Mrs. Greenow spoke as she put her foot upon the platform at the
Yarmouth station. Her maid's name was Jenny; but Kate had already
found, somewhat to her dismay, that orders had been issued before
they left London that the girl was henceforth to be called Jeannette.
Kate had also already found that her aunt could be imperious; but
this taste for masterdom had not shown itself so plainly in London
as it did from the moment that the train had left the station at
Shoreditch. In London Mrs. Greenow had been among Londoners, and her
career had hitherto been provincial. Her spirit, no doubt, had been
somewhat cowed by the novelty of her position. But when she felt
herself to be once beyond the stones as the saying used to be, she
was herself again; and at Ipswich she had ordered Jeannette to get
her a glass of sherry with an air which had created a good deal of
attention among the guards and porters.

The fly was procured; and with considerable exertion all Mrs.
Greenow's boxes, together with the more moderate belongings of her
niece and maid, were stowed on the top of it, round upon the driver's
body on the coach box, on the maid's lap, and I fear in Kate's also,
and upon the vacant seat.

"The large house in Montpelier Parade," said Mrs. Greenow.

"They is all large, ma'am," said the driver.

"The largest," said Mrs. Greenow.

"They're much of a muchness," said the driver.

"Then Mrs. Jones's," said Mrs. Greenow. "But I was particularly told
it was the largest in the row."

"I know Mrs. Jones's well," said the driver, and away they went.

Mrs. Jones's house was handsome and comfortable; but I fear Mrs.
Greenow's satisfaction in this respect was impaired by her
disappointment in finding that it was not perceptibly bigger than
those to the right and left of her. Her ambition in this and in
other similar matters would have amused Kate greatly had she been
a bystander, and not one of her aunt's party. Mrs. Greenow was
good-natured, liberal, and not by nature selfish; but she was
determined not to waste the good things which fortune had given, and
desired that all the world should see that she had forty thousand
pounds of her own. And in doing this she was repressed by no
feeling of false shame. She never hesitated in her demands through
bashfulness. She called aloud for such comfort and grandeur as
Yarmouth could afford her, and was well pleased that all around
should hear her calling. Joined to all this was her uncontrolled
grief for her husband's death.

"Dear Greenow! sweet lamb! Oh, Kate, if you'd only known that man!"
When she said this she was sitting in the best of Mrs. Jones's
sitting-rooms, waiting to have dinner announced. She had taken a
drawing-room and dining-room, "because," as she had said, "she didn't
see why people should be stuffy when they went to the seaside;--not
if they had means to make themselves comfortable."

"Oh, Kate, I do wish you'd known him!"

"I wish I had," said Kate,--very untruly. "I was unfortunately away
when he went to Vavasor Hall."

"Ah, yes; but it was at home, in the domestic circle, that Greenow
should have been seen to be appreciated. I was a happy woman,
Kate, while that lasted." And Kate was surprised to see that real
tears--one or two on each side--were making their way down her
aunt's cheeks. But they were soon checked with a handkerchief of the
broadest hem and of the finest cambric.

"Dinner, ma'am," said Jeannette, opening the door.

"Jeannette, I told you always to say that dinner was served."

"Dinner's served then," said Jeannette in a tone of anger.

"Come, Kate," said her aunt. "I've but little appetite myself, but
there's no reason you shouldn't eat your dinner. I specially wrote to
Mrs. Jones to have some sweetbread. I do hope she's got a decent cook.
It's very little I eat myself, but I do like to see things nice."

The next day was Sunday; and it was beautiful to see how Mrs. Greenow
went to church in all the glory of widowhood. There had been a great
unpacking after that banquet on the sweetbread, and all her funereal
millinery had been displayed before Kate's wondering eyes. The charm
of the woman was in this,--that she was not in the least ashamed of
anything that she did. She turned over all her wardrobe of mourning,
showing the richness of each article, the stiffness of the crape,
the fineness of the cambric, the breadth of the frills,--telling the
price of each to a shilling, while she explained how the whole had
been amassed without any consideration of expense. This she did with
all the pride of a young bride when she shows the glories of her
trousseau to the friend of her bosom. Jeannette stood by the while,
removing one thing and exhibiting another. Now and again through the
performance, Mrs. Greenow would rest a while from her employment, and
address the shade of the departed one in terms of most endearing
affection. In the midst of this Mrs. Jones came in; but the widow was
not a whit abashed by the presence of the stranger. "Peace be to his
manes!" she said at last, as she carefully folded up a huge black
crape mantilla. She made, however, but one syllable of the classical
word, and Mrs. Jones thought that her lodger had addressed herself to
the mortal "remains" of her deceased lord.


[Illustration: "Peace be to his manes."]


"He is left her uncommon well off, I suppose," said Mrs. Jones to
Jeannette.

"You may say that, ma'am. It's more nor a hundred thousand of
pounds!"

"No!"

"Pounds of sterling, ma'am! Indeed it is;--to my knowledge."

"Why don't she have a carriage?"

"So she do;--but a lady can't bring her carriage down to the sea when
she's only just buried her husband as one may say. What'd folks say
if they saw her in her own carriage? But it ain't because she can't
afford it, Mrs. Jones. And now we're talking of it you must order a
fly for church to-morrow, that'll look private, you know. She said I
was to get a man that had a livery coat and gloves."

The man with the coat and gloves was procured; and Mrs. Greenow's
entry into church made quite a sensation. There was a thoughtfulness
about her which alone showed that she was a woman of no ordinary
power. She foresaw all necessities, and made provision for all
emergencies. Another would not have secured an eligible sitting, and
been at home in Yarmouth church, till half the period of her sojourn
there was over. But Mrs. Greenow had done it all. She walked up the
middle aisle with as much self-possession as though the chancel had
belonged to her family for years; and the respectable pew-opener
absolutely deserted two or three old ladies whom she was attending,
to show Mrs. Greenow into her seat. When seated, she was the cynosure
of all eyes. Kate Vavasor became immediately aware that a great
sensation had been occasioned by their entrance, and equally aware
that none of it was due to her. I regret to say that this feeling
continued to show itself throughout the whole service. How many
ladies of forty go to church without attracting the least attention!
But it is hardly too much to say that every person in that church had
looked at Mrs. Greenow. I doubt if there was present there a single
married lady who, on leaving the building, did not speak to her
husband of the widow. There had prevailed during the whole two hours
a general though unexpressed conviction that something worthy of
remark had happened that morning. It had an effect even upon the
curate's reading; and the incumbent, while preaching his sermon,
could not keep his eyes off that wonderful bonnet and veil.

On the next morning, before eleven, Mrs. Greenow's name was put down
at the Assembly Room. "I need hardly say that in my present condition
I care nothing for these things. Of course I would sooner be alone.
But, my dear Kate, I know what I owe to you."

Kate, with less intelligence than might have been expected from one
so clever, began to assure her aunt that she required no society;
and that, coming thus with her to the seaside in the early days of
her widowhood, she had been well aware that they would live retired.
But Mrs. Greenow soon put her down, and did so without the slightest
feeling of shame or annoyance on her own part. "My dear," she said,
"in this matter you must let me do what I know to be right. I should
consider myself to be very selfish if I allowed my grief to interfere
with your amusements."

"But, aunt, I don't care for such amusements."

"That's nonsense, my dear. You ought to care for them. How are you to
settle yourself in life if you don't care for them?"

"My dear aunt, I am settled."

"Settled!" said Mrs. Greenow, astounded, as though there must have
been some hidden marriage of which she had not heard. "But that's
nonsense. Of course you're not settled; and how are you to be, if I
allow you to shut yourself up in such a place as this,--just where a
girl has a chance?"

It was in vain that Kate tried to stop her. It was not easy to stop
Mrs. Greenow when she was supported by the full assurance of being
mistress of the place and of the occasion. "No, my dear; I know very
well what I owe to you, and I shall do my duty. As I said before,
society can have no charms now for such a one as I am. All that
social intercourse could ever do for me lies buried in my darling's
grave. My heart is desolate, and must remain so. But I'm not going to
immolate you on the altars of my grief. I shall force myself to go
out for your sake, Kate."

"But, dear aunt, the world will think it so odd, just at present."

"I don't care twopence for the world. What can the world do to me?
I'm not dependent on the world,--thanks to the care of that sainted
lamb. I can hold my own; and as long as I can do that the world won't
hurt me. No, Kate, if I think a thing's right I shall do it. I mean
to make the place pleasant for you if I can, and the world may object
if it likes."

Mrs. Greenow was probably right in her appreciation of the value of
her independence. Remarks may perhaps have been made by the world of
Yarmouth as to her early return to society. People, no doubt, did
remind each other that old Greenow was hardly yet four months buried.
Mrs. Jones and Jeannette probably had their little jokes down-stairs.
But this did not hurt Mrs. Greenow. What was said, was not said in her
hearing, Mrs. Jones's bills were paid every Saturday with admirable
punctuality; and as long as this was done everybody about the
house treated the lady with that deference which was due to the
respectability of her possessions. When a recently bereaved widow
attempts to enjoy her freedom without money, then it behoves the
world to speak aloud;--and the world does its duty.

Numerous people came to call at Montpelier Parade, and Kate was
astonished to find that her aunt had so many friends. She was indeed
so bewildered by these strangers that she could hardly ascertain whom
her aunt had really known before, and whom she now saw for the first
time. Somebody had known somebody who had known somebody else, and
that was allowed to be a sufficient introduction,--always presuming
that the existing somebody was backed by some known advantages of
money or position. Mrs. Greenow could smile from beneath her widow's
cap in a most bewitching way. "Upon my word then she is really
handsome," Kate wrote one day to Alice. But she could also frown, and
knew well how to put aside, or, if need be, to reprobate any attempt
at familiarity from those whose worldly circumstances were supposed
to be disadvantageous.

"My dear aunt," said Kate one morning after their walk upon the pier,
"how you did snub that Captain Bellfield!"

"Captain Bellfield, indeed! I don't believe he's a captain at all. At
any rate he has sold out, and the tradesmen have had a scramble for
the money. He was only a lieutenant when the 97th were in Manchester,
and I'm sure he's never had a shilling to purchase since that."

"But everybody here seems to know him."

"Perhaps they do not know so much of him as I do. The idea of his
having the impudence to tell me I was looking very well! Nothing can
be so mean as men who go about in that way when they haven't money
enough in their pockets to pay their washerwomen."

"But how do you know, aunt, that Captain Bellfield hasn't paid his
washerwoman?"

"I know more than you think, my dear. It's my business. How could I
tell whose attentions you should receive and whose you shouldn't, if
I didn't inquire into these things?"

It was in vain that Kate rebelled, or attempted to rebel against this
more than maternal care. She told her aunt that she was now nearly
thirty, and that she had managed her own affairs, at any rate with
safety, for the last ten years;--but it was to no purpose. Kate would
get angry; but Mrs. Greenow never became angry. Kate would be quite
in earnest; but Mrs. Greenow would push aside all that her niece said
as though it were worth nothing. Kate was an unmarried woman with a
very small fortune, and therefore, of course, was desirous of being
married with as little delay as possible. It was natural that she
should deny that it was so, especially at this early date in their
mutual acquaintance. When the niece came to know her aunt more
intimately, there might be confidence between them, and then they
would do better. But Mrs. Greenow would spare neither herself nor her
purse on Kate's behalf, and she would be a dragon of watchfulness in
protecting her from the evil desires of such useless men as Captain
Bellfield.

"I declare, Kate, I don't understand you," she said one morning to
her niece as they sat together over a late breakfast. They had fallen
into luxurious habits, and I am afraid it was past eleven o'clock,
although the breakfast things were still on the table. Kate would
usually bathe before breakfast, but Mrs. Greenow was never out of her
room till half-past ten. "I like the morning for contemplation," she
once said. "When a woman has gone through all that I have suffered
she has a great deal to think of." "And it is so much more
comfortable to be a-thinking when one's in bed," said Jeannette, who
was present at the time. "Child, hold your tongue," said the widow.
"Yes, ma'am," said Jeannette. But we'll return to the scene at the
breakfast-table.

"What don't you understand, aunt?"

"You only danced twice last night, and once you stood up with Captain
Bellfield."

"On purpose to ask after that poor woman who washes his clothes
without getting paid for it."

"Nonsense, Kate; you didn't ask him anything of the kind, I'm sure.
It's very provoking. It is indeed."

"But what harm can Captain Bellfield do me?"

"What good can he do you? That's the question. You see, my dear,
years will go by. I don't mean to say you ain't quite as young
as ever you were, and nothing can be nicer and fresher than you
are;--especially since you took to bathing."

"Oh, aunt, don't!"

"My dear, the truth must be spoken. I declare I don't think I ever
saw a young woman so improvident as you are. When are you to begin to
think about getting married if you don't do it now?"

"I shall never begin to think about it, till I buy my wedding
clothes."

"That's nonsense,--sheer nonsense. How are you to get wedding clothes
if you have never thought about getting a husband? Didn't I see Mr.
Cheesacre ask you for a dance last night?"

"Yes, he did; while you were talking to Captain Bellfield yourself,
aunt."

"Captain Bellfield can't hurt me, my dear. And why didn't you dance
with Mr. Cheesacre?"

"He's a fat Norfolk farmer, with not an idea beyond the virtues of
stall-feeding."

"My dear, every acre of it is his own land,--every acre! And he
bought another farm for thirteen thousand pounds only last autumn.
They're better than the squires,--some of those gentlemen farmers;
they are indeed. And of all men in the world they're the easiest
managed."

"That's a recommendation, no doubt."

"Of course it is;--a great recommendation."

Mrs. Greenow had no idea of joking when her mind was intent on serious
things. "He's to take us to the picnic to-morrow, and I do hope
you'll manage to let him sit beside you. It'll be the place of
honour, because he gives all the wine. He's picked up with that
man Bellfield, and he's to be there; but if you allow your name to
be once mixed up with his, it will be all over with you as far as
Yarmouth is concerned."

"I don't at all want to be mixed up with Captain Bellfield, as you
call it," said Kate. Then she subsided into her novel, while Mrs.
Greenow busied herself about the good things for the picnic. In
truth, the aunt did not understand the niece. Whatsoever might be the
faults of Kate Vavasor, an unmaidenly desire of catching a husband
for herself was certainly not one of them.




CHAPTER VIII.

Mr. Cheesacre.


Yarmouth is not a happy place for a picnic. A picnic should be held
among green things. Green turf is absolutely an essential. There
should be trees, broken ground, small paths, thickets, and hidden
recesses. There should, if possible, be rocks, old timber, moss, and
brambles. There should certainly be hills and dales,--on a small
scale; and above all, there should be running water. There should be
no expanse. Jones should not be able to see all Greene's movements,
nor should Augusta always have her eye upon her sister Jane. But the
spot chosen for Mr. Cheesacre's picnic at Yarmouth had none of the
virtues above described. It was on the seashore. Nothing was visible
from the site but sand and sea. There were no trees there and nothing
green;--neither was there any running water. But there was a long,
dry, flat strand; there was an old boat half turned over, under which
it was proposed to dine; and in addition to this, benches, boards,
and some amount of canvas for shelter were provided by the liberality
of Mr. Cheesacre. Therefore it was called Mr. Cheesacre's picnic.

But it was to be a marine picnic, and therefore the essential
attributes of other picnics were not required. The idea had come from
some boating expeditions, in which mackerel had been caught, and
during which food had been eaten, not altogether comfortably, in the
boats. Then a thought had suggested itself to Captain Bellfield that
they might land and eat their food, and his friend Mr. Cheesacre had
promised his substantial aid. A lady had surmised that Ormesby sands
would be the very place for dancing in the cool of the evening. They
might "Dance on the sand," she said, "and yet no footing seen." And
so the thing had progressed, and the picnic been inaugurated.

It was Mr. Cheesacre's picnic undoubtedly. Mr. Cheesacre was to supply
the boats, the wine, the cigars, the music, and the carpenter's work
necessary for the turning of the old boat into a banqueting saloon.
But Mrs. Greenow had promised to provide the eatables, and enjoyed as
much of the _Ã©clat_ as the master of the festival. She had known Mr.
Cheesacre now for ten days and was quite intimate with him. He was a
stout, florid man, of about forty-five, a bachelor, apparently much
attached to ladies' society, bearing no sign of age except that he
was rather bald, and that grey hairs had mixed themselves with his
whiskers, very fond of his farming, and yet somewhat ashamed of it
when he found himself in what he considered to be polite circles. And
he was, moreover, a little inclined to seek the honour which comes
from a well-filled and liberally-opened purse. He liked to give a man
a dinner and then to boast of the dinner he had given. He was very
proud when he could talk of having mounted, for a day's hunting, any
man who might be supposed to be of higher rank than himself. "I had
Grimsby with me the other day,--the son of old Grimsby of Hatherwick,
you know. Blessed if he didn't stake my bay mare. But what matters? I
mounted him again the next day just the same." Some people thought he
was soft, for it was very well known throughout Norfolk that young
Grimsby would take a mount wherever he could get it. In these days
Mrs. Greenow had become intimate with Mr. Cheesacre, and had already
learned that he was the undoubted owner of his own acres.

"It wouldn't do for me," she had said to him, "to be putting myself
forward, as if I were giving a party myself, or anything of that
sort;--would it now?"

"Well, perhaps not. But you might come with us."

"So I will, Mr. Cheesacre, for that dear girl's sake. I should never
forgive myself if I debarred her from all the pleasures of youth,
because of my sorrows. I need hardly say that at such a time as this
nothing of that sort can give me any pleasure."

"I suppose not," said Mr. Cheesacre, with solemn look.

"Quite out of the question." And Mrs. Greenow wiped away her tears.
"For though as regards age I might dance on the sands as merrily as
the best of them--"

"That I'm sure you could, Mrs. Greenow."

"How's a woman to enjoy herself if her heart lies buried?"

"But it won't be so always, Mrs. Greenow."

Mrs. Greenow shook her head to show that she hardly knew how to answer
such a question. Probably it would be so always;--but she did not
wish to put a damper on the present occasion by making so sad a
declaration. "But as I was saying," continued she--"if you and I do
it between us won't that be the surest way of having it come off
nicely?"

Mr. Cheesacre thought that it would be the best way.

"Exactly so;--I'll do the meat and pastry and fruit, and you shall do
the boats and the wine."

"And the music," said Cheesacre, "and the expenses at the place." He
did not choose that any part of his outlay should go unnoticed.

"I'll go halves in all that if you like," said Mrs. Greenow. But Mr.
Cheesacre had declined this. He did not begrudge the expense, but
only wished that it should be recognised.

"And, Mr. Cheesacre," continued Mrs. Greenow. "I did mean to send the
music; I did, indeed."

"I couldn't hear of it, Mrs. Greenow."

"But I mention it now, because I was thinking of getting Blowehard
to come. That other man, Flutey, wouldn't do at all out in the open
air."

"It shall be Blowehard," said Mr. Cheesacre; and it was Blowehard. Mrs.
Greenow liked to have her own way in these little things, though her
heart did lie buried.

On the morning of the picnic Mr. Cheesacre came down to Montpelier
Parade with Captain Bellfield, whose linen on that occasion certainly
gave no outward sign of any quarrel between him and his washerwoman.
He was got up wonderfully, and was prepared at all points for the
day's work. He had on a pseudo-sailor's jacket, very liberally
ornamented with brass buttons, which displayed with great judgement
the exquisite shapes of his pseudo-sailor's duck trousers. Beneath
them there was a pair of very shiny patent-leather shoes, well
adapted for dancing on the sand, presuming him to be anxious of
doing so, as Venus offered to do, without leaving any footmarks. His
waistcoat was of a delicate white fabric, ornamented with very many
gilt buttons. He had bejewelled studs in his shirt, and yellow kid
gloves on his hands; having, of course, another pair in his pocket
for the necessities of the evening. His array was quite perfect, and
had stricken dismay into the heart of his friend Cheesacre, when he
joined that gentleman. He was a well-made man, nearly six feet high,
with dark hair, dark whiskers, and dark moustache, nearly black, but
of that suspicious hue which to the observant beholder seems always
to tell a tale of the hairdresser's shop. He was handsome, too, with
well-arranged features,--but carrying, perhaps, in his nose some
first symptoms of the effects of midnight amusements. Upon the whole,
however, he was a nice man to look at--for those who like to look on
nice men of that kind.

Cheesacre, too, had adopted something of a sailor's garb. He had on
a jacket of a rougher sort, coming down much lower than that of the
captain, being much looser, and perhaps somewhat more like a garment
which a possible seaman might possibly wear. But he was disgusted
with himself the moment that he saw Bellfield. His heart had been
faint, and he had not dared to ornament himself boldly as his friend
had done. "I say, Guss, you are a swell," he exclaimed. It may be
explained that Captain Bellfield had been christened Gustavus.

"I don't know much about that," said the captain; "my fellow sent me
this toggery, and said that it was the sort of thing. I'll change
with you if you like it." But Cheesacre could not have worn that
jacket, and he walked on, hating himself.

It will be remembered that Mrs. Greenow had spoken with considerable
severity of Captain Bellfield's pretensions when discussing his
character with her niece; but, nevertheless, on the present occasion
she received him with most gracious smiles. It may be that her
estimate of his character had been altered, or that she was making
sacrifice of her own feelings in consideration of Mr. Cheesacre, who
was known to be the captain's intimate friend. But she had smiles for
both of them. She had a wondrous power of smiling; and could, upon
occasion, give signs of peculiar favour to half a dozen different
gentlemen in as many minutes. They found her in the midst of hampers
which were not yet wholly packed, while Mrs. Jones, Jeannette, and the
cook of the household moved around her, on the outside of the circle,
ministering to her wants. She had in her hand an outspread clean
napkin, and she wore fastened round her dress a huge coarse apron,
that she might thus be protected from some possible ebullition of
gravy, or escape of salad mixture, or cream; but in other respects
she was clothed in the fullest honours of widowhood. She had not
mitigated her weeds by half an inch. She had scorned to make any
compromise between the world of pleasure and the world of woe. There
she was, a widow, declared by herself to be of four months' standing,
with a buried heart, making ready a dainty banquet with skill and
liberality. She was ready on the instant to sit down upon the baskets
in which the grouse pie had been just carefully inhumed, and talked
about her sainted lamb with a deluge of tears. If anybody didn't like
it, that person--might do the other thing. Mr. Cheesacre and Captain
Bellfield thought that they did like it.

"Oh, Mr. Cheesacre, if you haven't caught me before I've half done!
Captain Bellfield, I hope you think my apron becoming."

"Everything that you wear, Mrs. Greenow, is always becoming."

"Don't talk in that way when you know--; but never mind--we will
think of nothing sad to-day if we can help it. Will we, Mr.
Cheesacre?"

"Oh dear no; I should think not;--unless it should come on to rain."

"It won't rain--we won't think of such a thing. But, by the by,
Captain Bellfield, I and my niece do mean to send out a few things,
just in a bag you know, so that we may tidy ourselves up a little
after the sea. I don't want it mentioned, because if it gets about
among the other ladies, they'd think we wanted to make a dressing of
it;--and there wouldn't be room for them all; would there?"

"No; there wouldn't," said Mr. Cheesacre, who had been out on the
previous evening, inspecting, and perhaps limiting, the carpenters
in their work.

"That's just it," said Mrs. Greenow. "But there won't be any harm,
will there, Mr. Cheesacre, in Jeanette's going out with our things?
She'll ride in the cart, you know, with the eatables. I know
Jeannette's a friend of yours."

"We shall be delighted to have Jeanette," said Mr. Cheesacre.

"Thank ye, sir," said Jeannette, with a curtsey.

"Jeannette, don't you let Mr. Cheesacre turn your head; and mind you
behave yourself and be useful. Well; let me see;--what else is there?
Mrs. Jones, you might as well give me that ham now. Captain Bellfield,
hand it over. Don't you put it into the basket, because you'd turn it
the wrong side down. There now, if you haven't nearly made me upset
the apricot pie." Then, in the transfer of the dishes between the
captain and the widow, there occurred some little innocent by-play,
which seemed to give offence to Mr. Cheesacre; so that that gentleman
turned his back upon the hampers and took a step away towards the
door.

Mrs. Greenow saw the thing at a glance, and immediately applied
herself to cure the wound. "What do you think, Mr. Cheesacre," said
she, "Kate wouldn't come down because she didn't choose that you
should see her with an apron on over her frock!"

"I'm sure I don't know why Miss Vavasor should care about my seeing
her."

"Nor I either. That's just what I said. Do step up into the
drawing-room; you'll find her there, and you can make her answer for
herself."

"She wouldn't come down for me," said Mr. Cheesacre. But he didn't
stir. Perhaps he wasn't willing to leave his friend with the widow.

At length the last of the dishes was packed and Mrs. Greenow went
up-stairs with the two gentlemen. There they found Kate and two or
three other ladies who had promised to embark under the protection of
Mrs. Greenow's wings. There were the two Miss Fairstairs, whom Mrs.
Greenow had especially patronized, and who repaid that lady for her
kindness by an amount of outspoken eulogy which startled Kate by its
audacity.

"Your dear aunt!" Fanny Fairstairs had said on coming into the room.
"I don't think I ever came across a woman with such genuine milk of
human kindness!"

"Nor with so much true wit," said her sister Charlotte,--who had been
called Charlie on the sands of Yarmouth for the last twelve years.

When the widow came into the room, they flew at her and devoured her
with kisses, and swore that they had never seen her looking so well.
But as the bright new gloves which both the girls wore had been
presents from Mrs. Greenow, they certainly did owe her some affection.
There are not many ladies who would venture to bestow such gifts upon
their friends after so very short an acquaintance; but Mrs. Greenow
had a power that was quite her own in such matters. She was already
on a very confidential footing with the Miss Fairstairs, and had
given them much useful advice as to their future prospects.

And then was there a Mrs. Green, whose husband was first-lieutenant on
board a man-of-war on the West Indian Station. Mrs. Green was a quiet,
ladylike little woman, rather pretty, very silent, and, as one would
have thought, hardly adapted for the special intimacy of Mrs. Greenow.
But Mrs. Greenow had found out that she was alone, not very rich,
and in want of the solace of society. Therefore she had, from sheer
good-nature, forced herself upon Mrs. Green, and Mrs. Green, with much
trepidation, had consented to be taken to the picnic. "I know your
husband would like it," Mrs. Greenow had said, "and I hope I may live
to tell him that I made you go."

There came in also a brother of the Fairstairs girls, Joe Fairstairs,
a lanky, useless, idle young man, younger than them, who was supposed
to earn his bread in an attorney's office at Norwich, or rather to be
preparing to earn it at some future time, and who was a heavy burden
upon all his friends. "We told Joe to come to the house," said Fanny
to the widow, apologetically, "because we thought he might be useful
in carrying down the cloaks." Mrs. Greenow smiled graciously upon
Joe, and assured him that she was charmed to see him, without any
reference to such services as those mentioned.

And then they started. When they got to the door both Cheesacre and
the captain made an attempt to get possession of the widow's arm. But
she had it all arranged. Captain Bellfield found himself constrained
to attend to Mrs. Green, while Mr. Cheesacre walked down to the beach
beside Kate Vavasor. "I'll take your arm, Mr. Joe," said the widow,
"and the girls shall come with us." But when they got to the boats,
round which the other comers to the picnic were already assembled,
Mr. Cheesacre,--although both the boats were for the day his
own,--found himself separated from the widow. He got into that which
contained Kate Vavasor, and was shoved off from the beach while he
saw Captain Bellfield arranging Mrs. Greenow's drapery. He had
declared to himself that it should be otherwise; and that as he had
to pay the piper, the piper should play as he liked it. But Mrs.
Greenow with a word or two had settled it all, and Mr. Cheesacre had
found himself to be powerless. "How absurd Bellfield looks in that
jacket, doesn't he?" he said to Kate, as he took his seat in the boat.

"Do you think so? I thought it was so very pretty and becoming for
the occasion."

Mr. Cheesacre hated Captain Bellfield, and regretted more than ever
that he had not done something for his own personal adornment. He
could not endure to think that his friend, who paid for nothing,
should carry away the honours of the morning and defraud him of the
delights which should justly belong to him, "It may be becoming,"
said Cheesacre; "but don't you think it's awfully extravagant?"

"As to that I can't tell. You see I don't at all know what is the
price of a jacket covered all over with little brass buttons."

"And the waistcoat, Miss Vavasor!" said Cheesacre, almost solemnly.

"The waistcoat I should think must have been expensive."

"Oh, dreadful! and he's got nothing, Miss Vavasor; literally nothing.
Do you know,"--and he reduced his voice to a whisper as he made this
communication,--"I lent him twenty pounds the day before yesterday;
I did indeed. You won't mention it again, of course. I tell you,
because, as you are seeing a good deal of him just now, I think it
right that you should know on what sort of a footing he stands."
It's all fair, they say, in love and war, and this small breach of
confidence was, we must presume, a love stratagem on the part of Mr.
Cheesacre. He was at this time smitten with the charms both of the
widow and of the niece, and he constantly found that the captain was
interfering with him on whichever side he turned himself. On the
present occasion he had desired to take the widow for his share, and
was, upon the whole, inclined to think that the widow was the more
worthy of his attentions. He had made certain little inquiries within
the last day or two, the answers to which had been satisfactory.
These he had by no means communicated to his friend, to whom, indeed,
he had expressed an opinion that Mrs. Greenow was after all only a
flash in the pan. "She does very well pour passer le temps," the
captain had answered. Mr. Cheesacre had not quite understood the exact
gist of the captain's meaning, but had felt certain that his friend
was playing him false.

"I don't want it to be mentioned again, Miss Vavasor," he continued.

"Such things should not be mentioned at all," Kate replied,
having been angered at the insinuation that the nature of Captain
Bellfield's footing could be a matter of any moment to her.

"No, they shouldn't; and therefore I know that I'm quite safe with
you, Miss Vavasor. He's a very pleasant fellow, very; and has seen
the world,--uncommon; but he's better for eating and drinking with
than he is for buying and selling with, as we say in Norfolk. Do you
like Norfolk, Miss Vavasor?"

"I never was in it before, and now I've only seen Yarmouth."

"A nice place, Yarmouth, very; but you should come up and see our
lands. I suppose you don't know that we feed one-third of England
during the winter months."

"Dear me!"

"We do, though; nobody knows what a county Norfolk is. Taking it
altogether, including the game you know, and Lord Nelson, and its
watering-places and the rest of it, I don't think there's a county
in England to beat it. Fancy feeding one-third of all England and
Wales!"

"With bread and cheese, do you mean, and those sort of things?"

"Beef!" said Mr. Cheesacre, and in his patriotic energy he repeated
the word aloud. "Beef! Yes indeed; but if you were to tell them that
in London they wouldn't believe you. Ah! you should certainly come
down and see our lands. The 7.45 A.M. train would take you through
Norwich to my door, as one may say, and you would be back by the 6.22
P.M." In this way he brought himself back again into good-humour,
feeling, that in the absence of the widow, he could not do better
than make progress with the niece.

In the mean time Mrs. Greenow and the captain were getting on very
comfortably in the other boat. "Take an oar, Captain," one of the
men had said to him as soon as he had placed the ladies. "Not to-day,
Jack," he had answered. "I'll content myself with being bo'san this
morning." "The best thing as the bo'san does is to pipe all hands to
grog," said the man. "I won't be behind in that either," said the
captain; and so they all went on swimmingly.

"What a fine generous fellow your friend, Mr. Cheesacre, is!" said the
widow.

"Yes, he is; he's a capital fellow in his way. Some of these Norfolk
farmers are no end of good fellows."

"And I suppose he's something more than a common farmer. He's visited
by the people about where he lives, isn't he?"

"Oh, yes, in a sort of a way. The county people, you know, keep
themselves very much to themselves."

"That's of course. But his house;--he has a good sort of place,
hasn't he?"

"Yes, yes;--a very good house;--a little too near to the horse-pond
for my taste. But when a man gets his money out of the till, he
mustn't be ashamed of the counter;--must he, Mrs. Greenow?"

"But he could live like a gentleman if he let his own land, couldn't
he?"

"That depends upon how a gentleman wishes to live." Here the privacy
of their conversation was interrupted by an exclamation from a young
lady to the effect that Charlie Fairstairs was becoming sick. This
Charlie stoutly denied, and proved the truth of her assertion by her
behaviour. Soon after this they completed their marine adventures,
and prepared to land close to the spot at which the banquet was
prepared.




CHAPTER IX.

The Rivals.


There had been a pretence of fishing, but no fish had been caught.
It was soon found that such an amusement would interfere with the
ladies' dresses, and the affairs had become too serious to allow of
any trivial interruption. "I really think, Mr. Cheesacre," an anxious
mother had said, "that you'd better give it up. The water off the
nasty cord has got all over Maria's dress, already." Maria made a
faint protest that it did not signify in the least; but the fishing
was given up,--not without an inward feeling on the part of Mr.
Cheesacre that if Maria chose to come out with him in his boat,
having been invited especially to fish, she ought to have put up with
the natural results. "There are people who like to take everything
and never like to give anything," he said to Kate afterwards, as he
was walking up with her to the picnic dinner. But he was unreasonable
and unjust. The girls had graced his party with their best hats and
freshest muslins, not that they might see him catch a mackerel, but
that they might flirt and dance to the best advantage. "You can't
suppose that any girl will like to be drenched with sea-water when
she has taken so much trouble with her starch," said Kate. "Then she
shouldn't come fishing," said Mr. Cheesacre. "I hate such airs."

But when they arrived at the old boat, Mrs. Greenow shone forth
pre-eminently as the mistress of the occasion, altogether
overshadowing Mr. Cheesacre by the extent of her authority. There was
a little contest for supremacy between them, invisible to the eyes
of the multitude; but Mr. Cheesacre in such a matter had not a chance
against Mrs. Greenow. I am disposed to think that she would have
reigned even though she had not contributed to the eatables; but
with that point in her favour, she was able to make herself supreme.
Jeannette, too, was her servant, which was a great thing. Mr.
Cheesacre soon gave way; and though he bustled about and was
conspicuous, he bustled about in obedience to orders received, and
became a head servant. Captain Bellfield also made himself useful,
but he drove Mr. Cheesacre into paroxysms of suppressed anger by
giving directions, and by having those directions obeyed. A man to
whom he had lent twenty pounds the day before yesterday, and who had
not contributed so much as a bottle of champagne!

"We're to dine at four, and now it's half-past three," said Mrs.
Greenow, addressing herself to the multitude.

"And to begin to dance at six," said an eager young lady.

"Maria, hold your tongue," said the young lady's mother.

"Yes, we'll dine at four," said Mr. Cheesacre. "And as for the music,
I've ordered it to be here punctual at half-past five. We're to have
three horns, cymbals, triangle, and a drum."

"How very nice; isn't it, Mrs. Greenow?" said Charlie Fairstairs.

"And now suppose we begin to unpack," said Captain Bellfield. "Half
the fun is in arranging the things."

"Oh, dear, yes; more than half," said Fanny Fairstairs.

"Bellfield, don't mind about the hampers," said Cheesacre. "Wine is a
ticklish thing to handle, and there's my man there to manage it."

"It's odd if I don't know more about wine than the boots from the
hotel," said Bellfield. This allusion to the boots almost cowed Mr.
Cheesacre, and made him turn away, leaving Bellfield with the widow.

There was a great unpacking, during which Captain Bellfield and Mrs.
Greenow constantly had their heads in the same hamper. I by no means
intend to insinuate that there was anything wrong in this. People
engaged together in unpacking pies and cold chickens must have their
heads in the same hamper. But a great intimacy was thereby produced,
and the widow seemed to have laid aside altogether that prejudice
of hers with reference to the washerwoman. There was a long table
placed on the sand, sheltered by the upturned boat from the land
side, but open towards the sea, and over this, supported on poles,
there was an awning. Upon the whole the arrangement was not an
uncomfortable one for people who had selected so very uncomfortable
a dining-room as the sand of the sea-shore. Much was certainly due
to Mr. Cheesacre for the expenditure he had incurred,--and something
perhaps to Captain Bellfield for his ingenuity in having suggested
it.

Now came the placing of the guests for dinner, and Mr. Cheesacre
made another great effort. "I'll tell you what," he said, aloud,
"Bellfield and I will take the two ends of the table, and Mrs. Greenow
shall sit at my right hand." This was not only boldly done, but there
was a propriety in it which at first sight seemed to be irresistible.
Much as he had hated and did hate the captain, he had skilfully made
the proposition in such a way as to flatter him, and it seemed for a
few moments as though he were going to have it all his own way. But
Captain Bellfield was not a man to submit to defeat in such a matter
as this without an effort. "I don't think that will do," said he.
"Mrs. Greenow gives the dinner, and Cheesacre gives the wine. We must
have them at the two ends of the table. I am sure Mrs. Greenow won't
refuse to allow me to hand her to the place which belongs to her. I
will sit at her right hand and be her minister." Mrs. Greenow did not
refuse,--and so the matter was adjusted.

Mr. Cheesacre took his seat in despair. It was nothing to him that
he had Kate Vavasor at his left hand. He liked talking to Kate very
well, but he could not enjoy that pleasure while Captain Bellfield
was in the very act of making progress with the widow. "One would
think that he had given it himself; wouldn't you?" he said to Maria's
mother, who sat at his right hand.

The lady did not in the least understand him. "Given what?" said she.

"Why, the music and the wine and all the rest of it. There are some
people full of that kind of impudence. How they manage to carry it on
without ever paying a shilling, I never could tell. I know I have to
pay my way, and something over and beyond generally."

Maria's mother said, "Yes, indeed." She had other daughters there
besides Maria, and was looking down the table to see whether they
were judiciously placed. Her beauty, her youngest one, Ophelia, was
sitting next to that ne'er-do-well Joe Fairstairs, and this made
her unhappy. "Ophelia, my dear, you are dreadfully in the draught;
there's a seat up here, just opposite, where you'll be more
comfortable."

"There's no draught here, mamma," said Ophelia, without the slightest
sign of moving. Perhaps Ophelia liked the society of that lanky,
idle, useless young man.

The mirth of the table certainly came from Mrs. Greenow's end. The
widow had hardly taken her place before she got up again and changed
with the captain. It was found that the captain could better carve
the great grouse pie from the end than from the side. Cheesacre, when
he saw this, absolutely threw down his knife and fork violently upon
the table. "Is anything the matter?" said Maria's mother.

"Matter!" said he. Then he shook his head in grief of heart and
vexation of spirit, and resumed his knife and fork. Kate watched
it all, and was greatly amused. "I never saw a man so nearly
broken-hearted," she said, in her letter to Alice the next day.
"Eleven, thirteen, eighteen, twenty-one," said Cheesacre to himself,
reckoning up in his misery the number of pounds sterling which he
would have to pay for being ill-treated in this way.

"Ladies and gentlemen," said Captain Bellfield, as soon as the eating
was over, "if I may be permitted to get upon my legs for two minutes,
I am going to propose a toast to you." The real patron of the feast
had actually not yet swallowed his last bit of cheese. The thing was
indecent in the violence of its injustice.


[Illustration: Captain Bellfield proposes a toast.]


"If you please, Captain Bellfield," said the patron, indifferent to
the cheese in his throat, "I'll propose the toast."

"Nothing on earth could be better, my dear fellow," said the captain,
"and I'm sure I should be the last man in the world to take the job
out of the hands of one who would do it so much better than I can;
but as it's your health that we're going to drink, I really don't see
how you are to do it."

Cheesacre grunted and sat down. He certainly could not propose his
own health, nor did he complain of the honour that was to be done
him. It was very proper that his health should be drunk, and he had
now to think of the words in which he would return thanks. But the
extent of his horror may be imagined when Bellfield got up and made a
most brilliant speech in praise of Mrs. Greenow. For full five minutes
he went on without mentioning the name of Cheesacre. Yarmouth, he
said, had never in his days been so blessed as it had been this year
by the presence of the lady who was now with them. She had come among
them, he declared, forgetful of herself and of her great sorrows,
with the sole desire of adding something to the happiness of others.
Then Mrs. Greenow had taken out her pocket-handkerchief, sweeping back
the broad ribbons of her cap over her shoulders. Altogether the scene
was very affecting, and Cheesacre was driven to madness. They were
the very words that he had intended to speak himself.

"I hate all this kind of thing," he said to Kate. "It's so fulsome."

"After-dinner speeches never mean anything," said Kate.

At last, when Bellfield had come to an end of praising Mrs. Greenow,
he told the guests that he wished to join his friend Mr. Cheesacre in
the toast, the more so as it could hardly be hoped that Mrs. Greenow
would herself rise to return thanks. There was no better fellow than
his friend Cheesacre, whom he had known for he would not say how
many years. He was quite sure they would all have the most sincere
pleasure in joining the health of Mr. Cheesacre with that of Mrs.
Greenow. Then there was a clattering of glasses and a murmuring of
healths, and Mr. Cheesacre slowly got upon his legs.

"I'm very much obliged to this company," said he, "and to my friend
Bellfield, who really is,--but perhaps that doesn't signify now. I've
had the greatest pleasure in getting up this little thing, and I'd
made up my mind to propose Mrs. Greenow's health; but, h'm, ha, no
doubt it has been in better hands. Perhaps, considering all things,
Bellfield might have waited."

"With such a subject on my hands, I couldn't wait a moment."

"I didn't interrupt you, Captain Bellfield, and perhaps you'll let me
go on without interrupting me. We've all drunk Mrs. Greenow's health,
and I'm sure she's very much obliged. So am I for the honour you've
done me. I have taken some trouble in getting up this little thing,
and I hope you like it. I think somebody said something about
liberality. I beg to assure you that I don't think of that for a
moment. Somebody must pay for these sort of things, and I'm always
very glad to take my turn. I dare say Bellfield will give us the
next picnic, and if he'll appoint a day before the end of the month,
I shall be happy to be one of the party." Then he sat down with some
inward satisfaction, fully convinced that he had given his enemy a
fatal blow.

"Nothing on earth would give me so much pleasure," said Bellfield.
After that he turned again to Mrs. Greenow and went on with his
private conversation.

There was no more speaking, nor was there much time for other
after-dinner ceremonies. The three horns, the cymbals, the triangle,
and the drum were soon heard tuning-up behind the banqueting-hall,
and the ladies went to the further end of the old boat to make their
preparations for the dance. Then it was that the thoughtful care of
Mrs. Greenow, in having sent Jeannette with brushes, combs, clean
handkerchiefs, and other little knick-knackeries, became so apparent.
It was said that the widow herself actually changed her cap,--which
was considered by some to be very unfair, as there had been an
understanding that there should be no dressing. On such occasions
ladies are generally willing to forego the advantage of dressing
on the condition that other ladies shall forego the same advantage;
but when this compact is broken by any special lady, the treason
is thought to be very treacherous. It is as though a fencer should
remove the button from the end of his foil. But Mrs. Greenow was so
good-natured in tendering the services of Jeannette to all the young
ladies, and was so willing to share with others those good things of
the toilet which her care had provided, that her cap was forgiven her
by the most of those present.

When ladies have made up their minds to dance they will dance let the
circumstances of the moment be ever so antagonistic to that exercise.
A ploughed field in February would not be too wet, nor the side of a
house too uneven. In honest truth the sands of the seashore are not
adapted for the exercise. It was all very well for Venus to make the
promise, but when making it she knew that Adonis would not keep her
to her word. Let any lightest-limbed nymph try it, and she will find
that she leaves most palpable footing. The sands in question were
doubtless compact, firm, and sufficiently moist to make walking on
them comfortable; but they ruffled themselves most uncomfortably
under the unwonted pressure to which they were subjected.
Nevertheless our friends did dance on the sands; finding, however,
that quadrilles and Sir Roger de Coverley suited them better than
polkas and waltzes.

"No, my friend, no," Mrs. Greenow said to Mr. Cheesacre when that
gentleman endeavoured to persuade her to stand up; "Kate will be
delighted I am sure to join you,--but as for me, you must excuse me."

But Mr. Cheesacre was not inclined at that moment to ask Kate Vavasor
to dance with him. He was possessed by an undefined idea that Kate
had snubbed him, and as Kate's fortune was, as he said, literally
nothing, he was not at all disposed to court her favour at the
expense of such suffering to himself.

"I'm not quite sure that I'll dance myself," said he, seating himself
in a corner of the tent by Mrs. Greenow's side. Captain Bellfield at
that moment was seen leading Miss Vavasor away to a new place on
the sands, whither he was followed by a score of dancers; and Mr.
Cheesacre saw that now at last he might reap the reward for which he
had laboured. He was alone with the widow, and having been made bold
by wine, had an opportunity of fighting his battle, than which none
better could ever be found. He was himself by no means a poor man,
and he despised poverty in others. It was well that there should be
poor gentry, in order that they might act as satellites to those who,
like himself, had money. As to Mrs. Greenow's money, there was no
doubt. He knew it all to a fraction. She had spread for herself, or
some one else had spread for her, a report that her wealth was almost
unlimited; but the forty thousand pounds was a fact, and any such
innocent fault as that little fiction might well be forgiven to a
woman endorsed with such substantial virtues. And she was handsome
too. Mr. Cheesacre, as he regarded her matured charms, sometimes felt
that he should have been smitten even without the forty thousand
pounds. "By George! there's flesh and blood," he had once said to his
friend Bellfield before he had begun to suspect that man's treachery.
His admiration must then have been sincere, for at that time the
forty thousand pounds was not an ascertained fact. Looking at the
matter in all its bearings Mr. Cheesacre thought that he couldn't do
better. His wooing should be fair, honest, and above board. He was a
thriving man, and what might not they two do in Norfolk if they put
their wealth together?

"Oh, Mr. Cheesacre, you should join them," said Mrs. Greenow; "they'll
not half enjoy themselves without you. Kate will think that you mean
to neglect her."

"I shan't dance, Mrs. Greenow, unless you like to stand up for a set."

"No, my friend, no; I shall not do that. I fear you forget how recent
has been my bereavement. Your asking me is the bitterest reproach to
me for having ventured to join your festive board."

"Upon my honour I didn't mean it, Mrs. Greenow. I didn't mean it,
indeed."

"I do not suspect you. It would have been unmanly."

"And nobody can say that of me. There isn't a man or woman in Norfolk
that wouldn't say I was manly."

"I'm quite sure of that."

"I have my faults, I'm aware."

"And what are your faults, Mr. Cheesacre?"

"Well; perhaps I'm extravagant. But it's only in these kind of
things you know, when I spend a little money for the sake of making
my friends happy. When I'm about, on the lands at home, I ain't
extravagant, I can tell you."

"Extravagance is a great vice."

"Oh, I ain't extravagant in that sense;--not a bit in the world. But
when a man's enamoured, and perhaps looking out for a wife, he does
like to be a little free, you know."

"And are you looking out for a wife, Mr. Cheesacre?"

"If I told you I suppose you'd only laugh at me."

"No; indeed I would not. I am not given to joking when any one that I
regard speaks to me seriously."

"Ain't you though? I'm so glad of that. When one has really got a
serious thing to say, one doesn't like to have fun poked at one."

"And, besides, how could I laugh at marriages, seeing how happy I
have been in that condition?--so--very--happy," and Mrs. Greenow put
up her handkerchief to her eyes.

"So happy that you'll try it again some day; won't you?"

"Never, Mr. Cheesacre; never. Is that the way you talk of serious
things without joking? Anything like love--love of that sort--is
over for me. It lies buried under the sod with my poor dear departed
saint."

"But, Mrs. Greenow,"--and Cheesacre, as he prepared to argue the
question with her, got nearer to her in the corner behind the
table,--"But, Mrs. Greenow, care killed a cat, you know."

"And sometimes I think that care will kill me."

"No, by George; not if I can prevent it."

"You're very kind, Mr. Cheesacre; but there's no preventing such care
as mine."

"Isn't there though? I'll tell you what, Mrs. Greenow; I'm in earnest,
I am indeed. If you'll inquire, you'll find there isn't a fellow in
Norfolk pays his way better than I do, or is better able to do it. I
don't pay a sixpence of rent, and I sit upon seven hundred acres of
as good land as there is in the county. There's not an acre that
won't do me a bullock and a half. Just put that and that together,
and see what it comes to. And, mind you, some of these fellows that
farm their own land are worse off than if they'd rent to pay. They've
borrowed so much to carry on with, that the interest is more than
rent. I don't owe a sixpence to ere a man or ere a company in the
world. I can walk into every bank in Norwich without seeing my
master. There ain't any of my paper flying about, Mrs. Greenow. I'm
Samuel Cheesacre of Oileymead, and it's all my own." Mr. Cheesacre, as
he thus spoke of his good fortunes and firm standing in the world,
became impetuous in the energy of the moment, and brought down his
fist powerfully on the slight table before them. The whole fabric
rattled, and the boat resounded, but the noise he had made seemed to
assist him. "It's all my own, Mrs. Greenow, and the half of it shall
be yours if you'll please to take it;" then he stretched out his hand
to her, not as though he intended to grasp hers in a grasp of love,
but as if he expected some hand-pledge from her as a token that she
accepted the bargain.

"If you'd known Greenow, Mr. Cheesacre--"

"I've no doubt he was a very good sort of man."

"If you'd known him, you would not have addressed me in this way."

"What difference would that make? My idea is that care killed a cat,
as I said before. I never knew what was the good of being unhappy.
If I find early mangels don't do on a bit of land, then I sow late
turnips; and never cry after spilt milk. Greenow was the early
mangels; I'll be the late turnips. Come then, say the word. There
ain't a bedroom in my house,--not one of the front ones,--that isn't
mahogany furnished!"

"What's furniture to me?" said Mrs. Greenow, with her handkerchief to
her eyes.

Just at this moment Maria's mother stepped in under the canvas. It
was most inopportune. Mr. Cheesacre felt that he was progressing well,
and was conscious that he had got safely over those fences in the
race which his bashfulness would naturally make difficult to him. He
knew that he had done this under the influence of the champagne, and
was aware that it might not be easy to procure again a combination
of circumstances that would be so beneficial to him. But now he was
interrupted just as he was expecting success. He was interrupted,
and felt himself to be looking like a guilty creature under the eye
of the strange lady. He had not a word to say; but drawing himself
suddenly a foot and half away from the widow's side, sat there
confessing his guilt in his face.

Mrs. Greenow felt no guilt, and was afraid of no strange eyes. "Mr.
Cheesacre and I are talking about farming," she said.

"Oh; farming!" answered Maria's mother.

"Mr. Cheesacre thinks that turnips are better than early mangels,"
said Mrs. Greenow.

"Yes, I do," said Cheesacre,

"I prefer the early mangels," said Mrs. Greenow. "I don't think nature
ever intended those late crops. What do you say, Mrs. Walker?"

"I daresay Mr. Cheesacre understands what he's about when he's at
home," said the lady.

"I know what a bit of land can do as well as any man in Norfolk,"
said the gentleman.

"It may be very well in Norfolk," said Mrs. Greenow, rising from her
seat; "but the practice isn't thought much of in the other counties
with which I am better acquainted."

"I'd just come in to say that I thought we might be getting to the
boats," said Mrs. Walker. "My Ophelia is so delicate." At this moment
the delicate Ophelia was to be seen, under the influence of the
music, taking a distant range upon the sands with Joe Fairstairs' arm
round her waist. The attitude was justified by the tune that was in
progress, and there is no reason why a galop on the sands should have
any special termination in distance, as it must have in a room. But,
under such circumstances, Mrs. Walker's solicitude was not
unreasonable.

The erratic steps of the distant dancers were recalled and
preparations were made for the return journey. Others had strayed
besides the delicate Ophelia and the idle Joe, and some little time
was taken up in collecting the party. The boats had to be drawn down,
and the boatmen fetched from their cans and tobacco-pipes. "I hope
they're sober," said Mrs. Walker, with a look of great dismay.

"Sober as judges," said Bellfield, who had himself been looking after
the remains of Mr. Cheesacre's hampers, while that gentleman had been
so much better engaged in the tent.

"Because," continued Mrs. Walker, "I know that they play all manner of
tricks when they're--in liquor. They'd think nothing of taking us out
to sea, Mrs. Greenow."

"Oh, I do wish they would," said Ophelia.

"Ophelia, mind you come in the boat with me," said her mother, and
she looked very savage when she gave the order. It was Mrs. Walker's
intention that that boat should not carry Joe Fairstairs. But Joe and
her daughter together were too clever for her. When the boats went
off she found herself to be in that one over which Mr. Cheesacre
presided, while the sinning Ophelia with her good-for-nothing admirer
were under the more mirthful protection of Captain Bellfield.

"Mamma will be so angry," said Ophelia, "and it was all your fault. I
did mean to go into the other boat. Don't, Mr. Fairstairs." Then they
got settled down in their seats, to the satisfaction, let us hope, of
them both.

Mr. Cheesacre had vainly endeavoured to arrange that Mrs. Greenow
should return with him. But not only was Captain Bellfield opposed
to such a change in their positions, but so also was Mrs. Greenow. "I
think we'd better go back as we came," she said, giving her hand to
the Captain.

"Oh, certainly," said Captain Bellfield. "Why should there be any
change? Cheesacre, old fellow, mind you look after Mrs. Walker. Come
along, my hearty." It really almost appeared that Captain Bellfield
was addressing Mrs. Greenow as "his hearty," but it must be presumed
that the term of genial endearment was intended for the whole boat's
load. Mrs. Greenow took her place on the comfortable broad bench in
the stern, and Bellfield seated himself beside her, with the tiller
in his hand.

"If you're going to steer, Captain Bellfield, I beg that you'll be
careful."

"Careful,--and with you on board!" said the Captain. "Don't you know
that I would sooner perish beneath the waves than that a drop of
water should touch you roughly?"

"But you see, we might perish beneath the waves together."

"Together! What a sweet word that is;--perish together! If it were
not that there might be something better even than that, I would wish
to perish in such company."

"But I should not wish anything of the kind, Captain Bellfield, and
therefore pray be careful."

There was no perishing by water on that occasion. Mr. Cheesacre's boat
reached the pier at Yarmouth first, and gave up its load without
accident. Very shortly afterwards Captain Bellfield's crew reached
the same place in the same state of preservation. "There," said he,
as he handed out Mrs. Greenow. "I have brought you to no harm, at any
rate as yet."

"And, as I hope, will not do so hereafter."

"May the heavens forbid it, Mrs. Greenow! Whatever may be our lots
hereafter,--yours I mean and mine,--I trust that yours may be free
from all disaster. Oh, that I might venture to hope that, at some
future day, the privilege might be mine of protecting you from all
danger!"

"I can protect myself very well, I can assure you. Good night,
Captain Bellfield. We won't take you and Mr. Cheesacre out of your
way;--will we, Kate? We have had a most pleasant day."

They were now upon the esplanade, and Mrs. Greenow's house was to the
right, whereas the lodgings of both the gentlemen were to the left.
Each of them fought hard for the privilege of accompanying the widow
to her door; but Mrs. Greenow was self-willed, and upon this occasion
would have neither of them. "Mr. Joe Fairstairs must pass the house,"
said she, "and he will see us home. Mr. Cheesacre, good night. Indeed
you shall not;--not a step." There was that in her voice which
induced Mr. Cheesacre to obey her, and which made Captain Bellfield
aware that he would only injure his cause if he endeavoured to make
further progress in it on the present occasion.

"Well, Kate, what do you think of the day?" the aunt said when she
was alone with her niece.

"I never think much about such days, aunt. It was all very well, but
I fear I have not the temperament fitted for enjoying the fun. I
envied Ophelia Walker because she made herself thoroughly happy."

"I do like to see girls enjoy themselves," said Mrs. Greenow, "I do,
indeed;--and young men too. It seems so natural; why shouldn't young
people flirt?"

"Or old people either for the matter of that?"

"Or old people either,--if they don't do any harm to anybody. I'll
tell you what it is, Kate; people have become so very virtuous, that
they're driven into all manner of abominable resources for amusement
and occupation. If I had sons and daughters I should think a little
flirting the very best thing for them as a safety valve. When people
get to be old, there's a difficulty. They want to flirt with the
young people and the young people don't want them. If the old people
would be content to flirt together, I don't see why they should ever
give it up;--till they're obliged to give up every thing, and go
away."

That was Mrs. Greenow's doctrine on the subject of flirtation.




CHAPTER X.

Nethercoats.


We will leave Mrs. Greenow with her niece and two sisters at Yarmouth,
and returning by stages to London, will call upon Mr. Grey at his
place in Cambridgeshire as we pass by. I believe it is conceded by
all the other counties, that Cambridgeshire possesses fewer rural
beauties than any other county in England. It is very flat; it is
not well timbered; the rivers are merely dikes; and in a very large
portion of the county the farms and fields are divided simply by
ditches--not by hedgerows. Such arrangements are, no doubt, well
adapted for agricultural purposes, but are not conducive to rural
beauty. Mr. Grey's residence was situated in a part of Cambridgeshire
in which the above-named characteristics are very much marked. It was
in the Isle of Ely, some few miles distant from the Cathedral town,
on the side of a long straight road, which ran through the fields
for miles without even a bush to cheer it. The name of his place was
Nethercoats, and here he lived generally throughout the year, and
here he intended to live throughout his life.

His father had held a prebendal stall at Ely in times when prebendal
stalls were worth more than they are at present, and having also
been possessed of a living in the neighbourhood, had amassed a
considerable sum of money. With this he had during his life purchased
the property of Nethercoats, and had built on it the house in which
his son now lived. He had married late in life, and had lost his wife
soon after the birth of an only child. The house had been built in
his own parish, and his wife had lived there for a few months and had
died there. But after that event the old clergyman had gone back to
his residence in the Close at Ely, and there John Grey had had the
home of his youth. He had been brought up under his father's eye,
having been sent to no public school. But he had gone to Cambridge,
had taken college honours, and had then, his father dying exactly at
this time, declined to accept a fellowship. His father had left to
him an income of some fifteen hundred a year, and with this he sat
himself down, near to his college friends, near also to the old
cathedral which he loved, in the house which his father had built.

But though Nethercoats possessed no beauty of scenery, though the
country around it was in truth as uninteresting as any country
could be, it had many delights of its own. The house itself was as
excellent a residence for a country gentleman of small means as
taste and skill together could construct. I doubt whether prettier
rooms were ever seen than the drawing-room, the library, and the
dining-room at Nethercoats. They were all on the ground-floor, and
all opened out on to the garden and lawn. The library, which was
the largest of the three, was a handsome chamber, and so filled as
to make it well known in the University as one of the best private
collections in that part of England. But perhaps the gardens of
Nethercoats constituted its greatest glory. They were spacious
and excellently kept up, and had been originally laid out with
that knowledge of gardening without which no garden, merely as a
garden, can be effective. And such, of necessity, was the garden of
Nethercoats. Fine single forest trees there were none there, nor was
it possible that there should have been any such. Nor could there
be a clear rippling stream with steep green banks, and broken rocks
lying about its bed. Such beauties are beauties of landscape, and do
not of their nature belong to a garden. But the shrubs of Nethercoats
were of the rarest kind, and had been long enough in their present
places to have reached the period of their beauty. Nothing had been
spared that a garden could want. The fruit-trees were perfect in
their kind, and the glass-houses were so good and so extensive that
John Grey in his prudence was some times tempted to think that he had
too much of them.

It must be understood that there were no grounds, according to
the meaning usually given to that word, belonging to the house at
Nethercoats. Between the garden and the public road there was a
paddock belonging to the house, along the side of which, but divided
from it by a hedge and shrubbery, ran the private carriageway up to
the house. This swept through the small front flower-garden, dividing
it equally; but the lawns and indeed the whole of that which made
the beauty of the place lay on the back of the house, on which side
opened the windows from the three sitting-rooms. Down on the public
road there stood a lodge at which lived one of the gardeners. There
was another field of some six or seven acres, to which there was
a gate from the corner of the front paddock, and which went round
two sides of the garden. This was Nethercoats, and the whole estate
covered about twelve acres.

It was not a place for much bachelor enjoyment of that sort generally
popular with bachelors; nevertheless Mr. Grey had been constant in his
residence there for the seven years which had now elapsed since he
had left his college. His easy access to Cambridge had probably done
much to mitigate what might otherwise have been the too great tedium
of his life; and he had, prompted thereto by early associations,
found most of his society in the Close of Ely Cathedral. But, with
all the delight he could derive from these two sources, there had
still been many solitary hours in his life, and he had gradually
learned to feel that he of all men wanted a companion in his home.

His visits to London had generally been short and far between,
occasioned probably by some need in the library, or by the necessity
of some slight literary transaction with the editor or publisher of a
periodical. In one of these visits he had met Alice Vavasor, and had
remained in Town,--I will not say till Alice had promised to share
his home in Cambridgeshire, but so long that he had resolved before
he went that he would ask her to do so. He had asked her, and we
know that he had been successful. He had obtained her promise, and
from that moment all his life had been changed for him. Hitherto at
Nethercoats his little smoking-room, his books, and his plants had
been everything to him. Now he began to surround himself with an
infinity of feminine belongings, and to promise himself an infinity
of feminine blessings, wondering much that he should have been
content to pass so long a portion of his life in the dull seclusion
which he had endured. He was not by nature an impatient man; but now
he became impatient, longing for the fruition of his new idea of
happiness,--longing to have that as his own which he certainly loved
beyond all else in the world, and which, perhaps, was all he had ever
loved with the perfect love of equality. But though impatient, and
fully aware of his own impatience, he acknowledged to himself that
Alice could not be expected to share it. He could plan nothing
now,--could have no pleasure in life that she was not expected to
share. But as yet it could not be so with her. She had her house
in London, her town society, and her father. And, inasmuch as the
change for her would be much greater than it would be for him, it was
natural that she should require some small delay. He had not pressed
her. At least he had not pressed her with that eager pressure which
a girl must resist with something of the opposition of a contest,
if she resist it at all. But in truth his impatience was now waxing
strong, and during the absence in Switzerland of which we have
spoken, he resolved that a marriage very late in the autumn,--that a
marriage even in winter, would be better than a marriage postponed
till the following year. It was not yet late in August when the party
returned from their tour. Would not a further delay of two months
suffice for his bride?

Alice had written to him occasionally from Switzerland, and her
first two letters had been very charming. They had referred almost
exclusively to the tour, and had been made pleasant with some
slightly coloured account of George Vavasor's idleness, and of Kate's
obedience to her brother's behests. Alice had never written much of
love in her love-letters, and Grey was well enough contented with her
style, though it was not impassioned. As for doubting her love, it
was not in the heart of the man to do so after it had been once
assured to him by her word. He could not so slightly respect himself
or her as to leave room for such a doubt in his bosom. He was a man
who could never have suggested to himself that a woman loved him till
the fact was there before him; but who having ascertained, as he
might think, the fact, could never suggest to himself that her love
would fail him. Her first two letters from Switzerland had been very
pleasant; but after that there had seemed to have crept over her a
melancholy which she unconsciously transferred to her words, and
which he could not but taste in them,--at first unconsciously, also,
but soon with so plain a flavour that he recognised it, and made it a
matter of mental inquiry. During the three or four last days of the
journey, while they were at Basle and on their way home, she had not
written. But she did write on the day after her arrival, having then
received from Mr. Grey a letter, in which he told her how very much
she would add to his happiness if she would now agree that their
marriage should not be postponed beyond the end of October. This
letter she found in her room on her return, and this she answered at
once. And she answered it in such words that Mr. Grey resolved that he
would at once go to her in London. I will give her letter at length,
as I shall then be best able to proceed with my story quickly.


   Queen Anne Street,
   -- August, 186--.

   DEAREST JOHN,--

   We reached home yesterday tired enough, as we came through
   from Paris without stopping. I may indeed say that we
   came through from Strasbourg, as we only slept in Paris.
   I don't like Strasbourg. A steeple, after all, is not
   everything, and putting the steeple aside, I don't think
   the style is good. But the hotel was uncomfortable, which
   goes for so much;--and then we were saturated with beauty
   of a better kind.

   I got your letter directly I came in last night, and
   I suppose I had better dash at it at once. I would so
   willingly delay doing so, saying nice little things the
   while, did I not know that this would be mere cowardice.
   Whatever happens I won't be a coward, and therefore I will
   tell you at once that I can not let you hope that we should
   be married this year. Of course you will ask me why,
   as you have a right to do, and of course I am bound to
   answer. I do not know that I can give any answer with
   which you will not have a right to complain. If it be so,
   I can only ask your pardon for the injury I am doing you.

   Marriage is a great change in life,--much greater to me
   than to you, who will remain in your old house, will keep
   your old pursuits, will still be your own master, and will
   change in nothing,--except in this, that you will have a
   companion who probably may not be all that you expect.
   But I must change everything. It will be to me as though
   I were passing through a grave to a new world. I shall
   see nothing that I have been accustomed to see, and must
   abandon all the ways of life that I have hitherto adopted.
   Of course I should have thought of this before I accepted
   you; and I did think of it. I made up my mind that, as I
   truly loved you, I would risk the change;--that I would
   risk it for your sake and for mine, hoping that I might
   add something to your happiness, and that I might secure
   my own. Dear John, do not suppose that I despair that it
   may be so; but, indeed, you must not hurry me. I must tune
   myself to the change that I have to make. What if I should
   wake some morning after six months living with you, and
   tell you that the quiet of your home was making me mad?

   You must not ask me again till the winter shall have
   passed away. If in the meantime I shall find that I have
   been wrong, I will humbly confess that I have wronged
   you, and ask you to forgive me. And I will freely admit
   this. If the delay which I now purpose is so contrary
   to your own plans as to make your marriage, under such
   circumstances, not that which you had expected, I know
   that you are free to tell me so, and to say that our
   engagement shall be over. I am well aware that I can have
   no right to bind you to a marriage at one period which you
   had only contemplated as to take place at another period.
   I think I may promise that I will obey any wish you may
   express in anything,--except in that one thing which you
   urged in your last letter.

   Kate is going down to Yarmouth with Mrs. Greenow, and I
   shall see no more of her probably till next year, as she
   will be due in Westmoreland after that. George left me at
   the door when he brought me home, and declared that he
   intended to vanish out of London. Whether in town or out,
   he is never to be seen at this period of the year. Papa
   offers to go to Ramsgate for a fortnight, but he looks so
   wretched when he makes the offer, that I shall not have
   the heart to hold him to it. Lady Macleod very much wants
   me to go to Cheltenham. I very much want not to go, simply
   because I can never agree with her about anything; but
   it will probably end in my going there for a week or two.
   Over and beyond that, I have no prospects before Christmas
   which are not purely domestic. There is a project that we
   shall all eat our Christmas dinner at Vavasor Hall,--of
   course not including George,--but this project is quite
   in the clouds, and, as far as I am concerned, will remain
   there.

   Dear John, let me hear that this letter does not make you
   unhappy.

   Most affectionately yours,

   ALICE VAVASOR.


At Nethercoats, the post was brought in at breakfast-time, and Mr.
Grey was sitting with his tea and eggs before him, when he read
Alice's letter. He read it twice before he began to think what he
would do in regard to it, and then referred to one or two others
which he had received from Switzerland,--reading them also very
carefully. After that, he took up the slouch hat which he had been
wearing in the garden before he was called to his breakfast, and,
with the letters in his hand, sauntered down among the shrubs and
lawns.

He knew, he thought he knew, that there was more in Alice's mind than
a mere wish for delay. There was more in it than that hesitation to
take at once a step which she really desired to take, if not now,
then after some short interval. He felt that she was unhappy, and
unhappy because she distrusted the results of her marriage; but it
never for a moment occurred to him that, therefore, the engagement
between them should be broken. In the first place he loved her too
well to allow of his admitting such an idea without terrible sorrow
to himself. He was a constant, firm man, somewhat reserved, and
unwilling to make new acquaintances, and, therefore, specially
unwilling to break away from those which he had made. Undoubtedly,
had he satisfied himself that Alice's happiness demanded such a
sacrifice of himself, he would have made it, and made it without a
word of complaint. The blow would not have prostrated him, but the
bruise would have remained on his heart, indelible, not to be healed
but by death. He would have submitted, and no man would have seen
that he had been injured. But it did not once occur to him that such
a proceeding on his part would be beneficial to Alice. Without being
aware of it, he reckoned himself to be the nobler creature of the
two, and now thought of her as of one wounded, and wanting a cure.
Some weakness had fallen on her, and strength must be given to her
from another. He did not in the least doubt her love, but he knew
that she had been associated, for a few weeks past, with two persons
whose daily conversation would be prone to weaken the tone of her
mind. He no more thought of giving her up than a man thinks of having
his leg cut off because he has sprained his sinews. He would go up to
town and see her, and would not even yet abandon all hope that she
might be found sitting at his board when Christmas should come. By
that day's post he wrote a short note to her.

"Dearest Alice," he said, "I have resolved to go to London at once. I
will be with you in the evening at eight, the day after to-morrow.

"Yours, J. G."

There was no more in the letter than that.

"And now," she said, when she received it, "I must dare to tell him
the whole truth."



